# Cheat Sheet

## Principles of Modern Cryptography

- Formal definitions (syntax, security guarantee, threat model)
- Precise assumptions (mathematically or computational difficulties)
- Proofs of security (typically a proof by reduction)

## Maths (Indistinguishability)

### Statistical Distance

$$ SD(X, Y) = \frac{1}{2}\sum_{x} \left| \mathrm{Pr}[X=x] - \mathrm{Pr}[Y=x] \right|. $$

- **A distance metric.**
  - Non-negative. $SD(X, Y) \ge 0$
  - Identity of indiscernible. $SD(X, Y) = 0$ iff $X,Y$ are identically distributed
  - Symmetric. $SD(X,Y) = SD(Y,X)$
  - Triangle inequality. $SD(X,Z) \le SD(X,Y) + SD(Y, Z)$
- **No more than 1.** $SD(X, Y) \le 1$
- **Replacement.** $SD(f(X), f(Y)) \le SD(X,Y)$ for any $f$

For joint random variables,

$$ SD(X, Y \mid Z) = SD((X, Z), (Y, Z)). $$

**Lemma.** For RV $X$ and $Y$ and any distinguisher $\mathcal{D}$

$$ \left| \mathrm{Pr}[\mathcal{D}(X) = 1] - \mathrm{Pr}[\mathcal{D}(Y) = 1] \right| \le SD(X,Y). $$

**Alternative Definition** for statistical distance

$$ SD(X,Y) = \max_{\mathcal{D}} \left| \mathrm{Pr}[\mathcal{D}(X) = 1] - \mathrm{Pr}[\mathcal{D}(Y) = 1] \right|. $$

**Implication.** $SD(X,Y) \le \epsilon$ implies that every (even unbounded) distinguisher satisfies

$$ |\mathrm{Pr}[D(X) = 1] - \mathrm{Pr}[D(Y) = 1]| \le \epsilon $$

### Computational Distance

$$ CD(X, Y) \le \epsilon $$

if every PPT distinguisher $D$ satisfies

$$ \left| \mathrm{Pr}[D(X) = 1] - \mathrm{Pr}[D(Y) = 1] \right| \le \epsilon $$

### Entropy

$$ \mathrm{H}_\alpha(X) = \frac{1}{1 - \alpha}\log\left( \sum_{i=1}^n p_i^\alpha \right). $$

- **Hartley/Max-Entropy.** $\mathrm{H}_0(X) = \log n = \log |X|$
- **Shannon Entropy.** $\mathrm{H}_1(X) = \lim_{\alpha \to 1}\mathrm{H}_\alpha(X) = -\sum_{i=1}^n p_i \log p_i $
- **Collision Entropy.** $\mathrm{H}_2(X) = -\log\sum_{i=1}^n p_i^2 = -\log P(X=Y)$
- **Min-Entropy.** $\mathrm{H}_\infty (X) = \min_i(-\log p_i) = - \log \max_i p_i$
- **(Unpredictable) Pseudo-Entropy.** $H_u(X \mid Z) = k$ if for every PPT algorithm $A$, $\mathrm{Pr}[A(z) = x] \le 2^{-k}$

### Statistical Security

An encryption scheme $\Pi = (Gen, Enc, Dec)$ over message space $\mathcal{M}$ is $\epsilon$-secure in presence of eavesdroppers if for every adversary $A$ it holds that

$$ \mathrm{Pr}[\mathrm{Priv}_{A,\Pi}^{eav} = 1] \le \frac{1}{2} + \frac{\epsilon}{2}. $$

Or equivalently

$$ \frac{1}{2} - \frac{\epsilon}{2} \le \mathrm{Pr}[\mathrm{Priv}_{A,\Pi}^{eav} = 1] \le \frac{1}{2} + \frac{\epsilon}{2}. $$

Or alternatively

$$ \left| \mathrm{Pr}_{k \leftarrow Gen(1^n)} \left[ D(Enc_k(m_0)) = 1 \right] - \mathrm{Pr}_{k \leftarrow Gen(1^n)} \left[ D(Enc_k(m_1)) = 1 \right] \right| \le \epsilon $$

for every distinguisher $D$ and $m_0 \neq m_1 \in \mathcal{M}$.

### Unpredictability

A random variable $X$ is $\epsilon$-unpredictable if for every algorithm $A$ it holds that

$$ \mathrm{Pr}[A(1^n) = X] \le \epsilon. $$

A random variable $X$ is $\epsilon$-unpredictable iff

$$ \mathrm{H}_\infty(X) \ge \log(1/\epsilon) $$

### Computational Indistinguishability

An encryption scheme $\Pi = (Gen, Enc, Dec)$ has indistinguishable encryptions in the presence of an eavesdropper if for all *PPT adversaries* $A$ there exists a negligible function $\mathrm{negl}()$ s.t.

$$ \mathrm{Pr}\left[ \mathrm{Priv}_{A, \Pi}^{eav} = 1 \right] \le \frac{1}{2} + \mathrm{negl}(n).$$

Alternatively

$$ \left| \mathrm{Pr}\left[ D(Enc_k(m_0), state) = 1 \right] - \mathrm{Pr}\left[ D(Enc_k(m_1), state) = 1 \right] \right| \le \mathrm{negl}(n). $$

### Semantic Security

*Indistinguishability means ciphertext leaks no information about individual bits of the plaintext.*

Let $\Pi = (Gen, Enc, Dec)$ be a private-key encryption scheme with indistinguishable encryptions in the presence of an eavesdropper. For all PPT adversaries $\tilde{A}$ and all $i$, there exists a negligible function $\mathrm{negl}()$ s.t.

$$ \mathrm{Pr}[\tilde{A}(1^n, Enc_k(m)) = m^i] \le \frac{1}{2} + \mathrm{negl}(n). $$

*No PPT adversary can learn any function of the plaintext given the ciphertext. I.e., the adversary can achieve the same probability with or without the ciphertext.*

Let $\Pi = (Gen, Enc, Dec)$ be a private-key encryption scheme with indistinguishable encryptions in the presence of an eavesdropper. Then for every PPT adversary $A$ there exists a PPT algorithm $A'$ s.t. for every polynomial-time computable function $f$ and every efficiently sampleable set $\mathcal{S}$ there exists a negligible function $\mathrm{negl}()$ s.t.

$$ \left| \mathrm{Pr}\left[ A(1^n, Enc_k(m)) = f(m) \right] - \mathrm{Pr}\left[ A'(1^n) = f(m) \right] \right| \le \mathrm{negl}(m). $$

#### Semantic Security

A private-key encryption scheme $\Pi = (Gen, Enc, Dec)$ is semantically secure in the presence of an eavesdropper if for every PPT algorithm $A$ there exists a PPT algorithm $A'$ s.t. for every efficiently-sampleable distribution $M$ adn all polynomial-time computable $f$ and $h$, there exists a negligible function $\mathrm{negl}()$ s.t.

$$ \mathrm{Pr}[A(1^n, Enc_k(m), h(m)) = f(m)] - \mathrm{Pr}[A'(1^n, h(m)) = f(m)] \le \mathrm{negl}(n). $$

Here $h(m)$ can be interpreted as "arbitrary external information" of $x$.

## Maths (Randomness, Hash Functions, One-way Functions)

### Randomness Extractor

An $(n,k,m,d,\epsilon)$-randomness extractor is a function $\mathrm{Ext}: \{0,1\}^n \times \{0,1\}^d \to \{0,1\}^m$ that for every $X$ of length $n$ and min-entropy at least $k$ we have

$$ SD((\mathrm{Ext}(X, U_d), U_d), U_{m+d}) \le \epsilon. $$

Intuitively, an extractor "extracts" (shorter) almost-perfect random numbers from (longer) imperfect randomness.

- $k-d$ is the entropy loss

### Universal Hash Functions

$H \subseteq \{ h: \{0,1\}^L \mapsto \{0,1\}^t \}$$ is a family of universal hash functions for any distinct $x_1, x_2 \in \{0,1\}^L$,

$$ \mathrm{Pr}[h(x_1) = h(x_2): h \leftarrow H] \le 1/2^t. $$

### Leftover Hash Lemma

For any integers $d \le k \le l$, let $\mathcal{H} \subseteq \{ h: \{0,1\}^l \mapsto  \{0,1\}^{k-d} \}$ be a family of universal hash functions. For any random variable $X$ over $\{0,1\}^l$ with min-entropy $\mathrm{H}_\infty(X) \ge k$

$$ SD(H(X), U_{k-d} \mid H) \le 2^{-\frac{d}{2} - 1}. $$

- From GPT-4
  - Deals with the hash function's ability to produce "almost uniform" randomness from weak random sources.
  - Particularly useful in scenarios where one needs to ensure that even if the input has some predictable components (not perfectly random), the output of the hash function still achieves a high degree of randomness

### Pseudorandom Generator

*From short uniform strings to longer "uniform-looking" strings.*

Let $g: \{0,1\}^n \mapsto \{0,1\}^l (l > n)$ be a deterministic polynomial-time algorithm. $g$ is a pseudorandom generator (PRG) if for all PPT distinguishers $D$

$$ \left| \mathrm{Pr}[D(g(U_n)) = 1] - \mathrm{Pr}[D(U_l) = 1] \right| = \mathrm{negl}(n). $$

**Replacement Lemma.** If $X,Y$ is $(t,\epsilon)$-distinguishable and function $f$ is $T$-computable, then $f(X)$ and $f(Y)$ is at least $(t-T, \epsilon)$-indistinguishable.

**Corollary.** $SD(f(X), f(Y)) \le SD(X,Y)$.

**Switching Lemma.** $X_1,\dots,X_m$ satisfy for every $1 \le i \le m-1$ $X_i$ is $(t_1, \epsilon_i)$-indistinguishable from $X_{i+1}$, we have that $X_1$ is $(t,\epsilon)$-indistinguishable from $X_m$ where $t=\min(t_1,\dots,t_{m-1})$ and $\epsilon = \epsilon_1 + \cdots + \epsilon_{m-1}$.

**Sequential Composition of PRGs.** Let $g: \{0,1\}^n \mapsto \{0,1\}^{n+s}$ be a $(t,\epsilon)$-secure PRG. If we consider $s_i \mapsto (s_{i+1}, r_{i+1})$ where $s_i, s_{i+1} \in \{0,1\}^n$ and $r_{i+1} \in \{0,1\}^s$. For any $q(n) \in \mathbb{N}$ define $g^q :\{ 0,1 \}^n \mapsto \{0,1\}^{n+qs}$, where we iteratively compute $(s_{i+1}, r_{i+1}) = g(s_i)$, we have $g^q$ is a $(t-q\cdot\mathrm{poly}(n), q\cdot\epsilon)$-secure PRG where $\mathrm{poly}(n)$ is the running time for computing $g$.

### One-Way Functions

Function $f: \{0,1\}^n \to \{0,1\}^l$ is a one-way function if it is

- easy-to-compute. $f$ can be computed in polynomial time.
- hard-to-invert. For every PPT $A$, $\mathrm{Pr}[f(x') = f(x)] \le \mathrm{negl}(n)$.

A function $f$ is a one-way permutation if it is a one-way function and a permutation (one-to-one).

- Existence of one-way functions imply $P \neq NP$.
- Candidates: integer factorization, subset-sum, discrete logarithm.

### Hardcore Predicate

*A one-way function is hard-to-invert, but it does not mean $f$ does not leak any information of $x$. Still, some information about $x$ must be hard to get computationally. Such information is formalized as hardcore predicates. Basically guessing this predicate is as hard as reversing the function.*

A polynomial-time computable predicate $h_c: \{0,1\}^n \mapsto 0/1$ is a hardcore predicate of a function $f: \{0,1\}^n \mapsto \{0,1\}^l$ if for every PPT algorithm $A$

$$ \mathrm{Pr}[A(f(x)) = h_c(x)] \le \frac{1}{2} + \mathrm{negl}(n). $$

### Goldreich-Levin Theorem

*Actually, we can construct a PRG based on any one-way function/permutation. The first step is to show that a hardcore predicate exists for any one-way function. This is guaranteed by the Goldreich-Levin Theorem.*

**Goldreich-Levin Theorem.** Let $f:\{0,1\}^n \mapsto \{0,1\}^{l(n)}$ be a one-way function and define the padded one-way function and define the padded one-way function $f':\{0,1\}^n \times \{0,1\}^n \mapsto \{0,1\}^{l(n)} \times \{0,1\}^{n}$ as

$$ f'(x, r) = (f(x), r) $$

where $|x| = |r|$. Let

$$gl(x,r) = \bigoplus_{i=1}^n x_i \cdot r_i \mod 2 $$

Then $gl()$ is a hardcore predicate.

### PRG from One-Way Function and Hardcore Predicate

*The next step is to show that the hardcore predicate of a one-way permutation can be used to construct a pseudorandom generator.*

**Theorem.** If a permutation $f: \{0,1\}^n \mapsto \{0,1\}^n$ has a hardcore predicate $h_c: \{0,1\}^n \mapsto \{0,1\}$ (which implies that $f$ is a one-way permutation). Then, function

$$ g(x) = (f(x), h_c(x)) $$

is a pseudorandom generator from $\{0,1\}^n$ to $\{0,1\}^{n+1}$.

*More generally, it can be shown that one-way functions imply pseudorandom generators.*

**Theorem (generalized).** Any PRG $G: \{0,1\}^n \mapsto \{0,1\}^m$ implies a PRG $G': \{0,1\}^n \mapsto \{0,1\}^{m'}$ for any $m' = \mathrm{poly}(n)$

### Regular Functions

$f$ is a regular function if the preimage size $\alpha = |f^{-1}(y)|$ is fixed (independent of $y$).

- A **known regular function** is a regular function whose regularity $\alpha$ is polynomial-time computable from security parameter $n$
  - One-way permutation is a special case of known-regular OWFs
- An **unknown regular function** is a regular function whose regularity $\alpha$ is inefficient to approximate from security parameter $n$

### Pseudorandom Functions (PRF)

Let $F: \{0,1\}^{\kappa(n)} \times \{0,1\}^n \mapsto \{0,1\}^{l(n)}$ be an efficient keyed function $F_k(x) \triangleq F(k,x)$. We say $F$ is a pseudorandom function (PRF) if for all PPT distinguishers $D$,

$$ \left| \mathrm{Pr}[D^{F_k()}(1^n) = 1] - \mathrm{Pr}[D^{R()}(1^n) = 1] \right| \le \mathrm{negl}(n) $$

where $k \leftarrow \{0,1\}^{\kappa(n)}$ and $R()$ is a function chosen uniformly at random from the set of all functions mapping $n$-bit strings to $l(n)$-bit strings.

Here we can regard the $\kappa(n)$-bit string as key and $n$-bit string as the actual input

### Pseudorandom Permutations (PRP)

Let $P:\{0,1\}^{\kappa(n)} \times \{0,1\}^n \mapsto \{0,1\}^n$ be an efficient keyed permutation ($P_k(x) \triangleq P(k,x)$). We say $P$ is a pseudorandom permutation if for all PPT distinguishers $D$,

$$ \left| \mathrm{Pr}[D^{P_k, P^{-1}_k}(1^n) = 1] - \mathrm{Pr}[D^{\pi, \pi^{-1}}(1^n) = 1] \right| \le \mathrm{negl}(n) $$

where $k \leftarrow \{0,1\}^{\kappa(n)}$ and $\pi(\cdot)$ is a permutation chosen uniformly at random from the set of all permutations on $n$-bit strings.

## Maths (Public Key Encryption)

### Modulo Arithmetic

#### Divisor

Let $a$, $b$ be two integers, where $b$ is non-zero, $b$ divides $a$ if there exists some integer $m$ such that $a = mb$

- Denoted by $b|a$.
- $b$ is a **divisor** of $a$.
- If $b|1$ then $b = \pm 1$.
- If $b|a$ and $a|b$ then $b = \pm a$.
- If $b|0$ then $b \neq 0$.
- If $b|g$ and $b|h$ then $b|(mg+nh)$ for any integers $m,n$.

#### Congruence

$a$ is **congruent to** $b$ modulo $n$ if $n | a -b$.

- Denoted by $a \equiv b \mod n$
- Congruence is an *equivalent relation*.
  - $a \equiv a \mod n$.
  - $a \equiv b \mod n$ implies $b \equiv a \mod n$.
  - $a \equiv b \mod n$ and $b \equiv c \mod n$ imply $a \equiv c \mod n$

#### Modular Reduction

$$a \mod n = r$$

- $r$ is the remainder (**residue**) of $a \mod n$
- $a = qn + r$ where $0 \le r < n$
- $q$ is called the **quotient**

For any integers $a,b$ and positive integer $n$,

$$ a \equiv b \mod n \Longleftrightarrow a \mod n = b \mod n $$

- $a + b \equiv a + c \mod n \Longrightarrow b \equiv c \mod n$
$ab \equiv ac \mod n \Longrightarrow b \equiv c \mod n$ only if $a$ is relatively prime to $n$

#### Prime and Composite Numbers

An integer $p$ is **prime** if its only divisors are $\pm 1$ and $\pm p$. Otherwise it is a **composite** number.

**Prime Factorization.** Any positive integer $a$ can be factored in a unique way as

$$ a = p_1^{\alpha_1}\cdots p_t^{\alpha_t} $$

where $p_i$ are prime numbers and each $\alpha_i$ is a natural number.

#### Greatest Common Divisor (GCD)

**Greatest Common Divisor.** $\mathrm{gcd}(a,b)$ of $a$ and $b$ is the largest number that divides both $a$ and $b$.

**Euclidean Algorithm.** The Euclidean algorithm is used for solving GCD

```py
def gcd(a, b):
  while b > 0:
    r = a % b
    a = b
    b = r
  return a
```

#### Modular Inverse

$a$ is a **modular inverse** of $b \mod n$, denoted by $b^{-1} \mod n$ if $ab \mod n = 1$.

- $3$ is the modular inverse of $5 \mod 7$. I.e., $5^{-1} \mod 7 = 3$.
- $7$ is the modular inverse of $7 \mod 16$. I.e., $7^{-1} \mod 16 =7$.

**Theorem (Existence of Modular Inverse).** There exists a modular inverse for $b \mod n$ iff $b$ is relatively prime to $n$.

**Extended Euclidean Algorithm.** The extended Euclidean algorithm can be used to solve the integer equation

$$ ax + by = \mathrm{gcd}(a,b) $$

The extended Euclidean algorithm can be used to solve for modular inverse. Suppose $\mathrm{gcd}(a,n)=1$. Compute $a^{-1} \mod n$.

- Suppose $\mathrm{gcd}(a,n)= 1$, to compute $a^{-1} \mod n$, we compute $x$ and $y$ such that $ax + ny = \mathrm{gcd}(a, n)$, then $x \mod n$ is $a^{-1} \mod n$.

#### The Euler Phi Function

**The Euler Phi Function $\phi(n)$.** For $n \ge 1$, $\phi(n)$ denotes the number of integers in the interval $[1, n]$ which are relatively prime to $n$. The function $\phi$ is called the **Euler Phi Function** (or the Euler Totient Function).

$$ \phi(n) =  |\{ x: 1 \le x \le n \land \mathrm{gcd}(x,n)= 1 \}| $$

#### Fermat's Little Theorem & Euler's Generalization

**Theorem (Fermat's Little Theorem).** Let $p$ be a prime. Any integer $a$ not divisible by $p$ satisfies $a^{p-1} \equiv 1 \mod p$.

**Theorem (Euler's Generalization).** Let $n$ be a positive integer. Then

$$ a^{\phi(n)} \equiv 1 \mod n $$

for any integer $a$ which is relatively prime to $n$.

**Note.** Fermat's Little Theorem is a special case of Euler's Generalization, when $n = p$ is a prime.

#### Modular Exponentiation

For integer $a$ and positive integers $k,n$, if $a$ and $n$ are co-prime, then

$$ a^k \mod n = a^{k \mod \phi(n)} \mod n. $$

The implication is that we can perform $k \mod \phi(n)$ first if $k$ is large. E.g., $11^{1,073,741,823} \mod 13$.

### Group Theory

#### Groups

Let $G$ be a nonempty set and $\circ$ be a binary operation on $G$. $(G, \circ)$ is a **group** if the following conditions are satisfied

- **Closed.** $\forall a,b \in G, a \circ b \in G$
- **Associative.** $\forall a,b,c \in G, (a \circ b) \circ c = a \circ (b \circ c)$
- **Identity.** There exists an identity element $e \in G$ s.t. $\forall a \in G, a \circ e = a$
- **Inverse.** For each $a \in G$, there exists an inverse of $a$, denoted by $a^{-1}$ s.t. $a \circ a^{-1} = e$

If $\circ$ is also commutative ($\forall a,b \in G, a \circ b = b \circ a$) then $(G, \circ)$ is an Abelian group

In this course, the most frequently used groups are additive and multiplicative groups.

#### Side Note on Multiplicative Groups

Let $Z_n = \{ 0, 1, \dots, n-1 \}$ and $Z_n^* = \{ a \in Z_n | \mathrm{gcd}(a, n) = 1 \}$.

- For multiplication, not all $Z_n \backslash \{0\}$ form multiplicative groups with identity $1$.
  - It depends on the value of $n$. E.g., $n = 8$ does not form multiplicative group but $n=7$ does.

#### Cyclic Groups

A group is **cyclic** if there is an element $g \in G$ s.t. for each $a \in G$, there exists an integer $i$ with $a = g^i$ ($g$ operates on itself for $i$ times, here we use the notation commonly used for multiplicative groups)

- $g$ is called a **generator** or **primitive element** of $G$
- $g$ is also said to be a **primitive root**

Note that not all multiplicative groups of positive composite integers are cyclic. $Z_n^*$ has (at least one) generator iff $n=2, 4, p^k, 2p^k$ where $p$ is an odd prime and $k \ge 1$

- Let $G$ be a cyclic group with order $m$ ($|G|= m$) and $g \in G$ is a generator.
  - We have $g^m = e$, where $e$ is the identity
  - For any non-negative $x,y$, $g^{xy} = g^{yx}$
  - For any non-negative $x$, $g^x = g^{x \mod m}$
  - For any element $h \in G$ and any non-negative integer $x$, $h^x = h^{x \mod m}$

### Generating Random Primes

To generate an $n$-bit prime, we first generate a random $n$-bit number in $[2^{n-1}, 2^n-1)$ and test if it is prime. Repeat this until we have a prime (or we are unlucky)

- For primality test, we could use the Miller-Rabin test

### Cryptographic Hardness Assumptions

#### The Factoring Assumption

Let $GenModulus$ be a polynomial-time algorithm

$$ GenModulus(1^n) \to (N, p, q) $$

where $N =pq$ and $p,q$ are $n$-bit primes.

Consider the following experiment for an given algorithm $A$,

1. $GenModulus(1^n) \to (N, p, q)$
2. $A(N) \to (p', q')$
3. Outputs 1 if $N = p'q'$ and $0$ otherwise

The Factoring Assumption is the assumption that there exists a $GenModulus$ algorithm relative to which factoring is hard.

- An instance of $GenModulus$ is generate two uniform primes and multiply them to obtain $N$.

#### The RSA Assumption

Let $GenRSA$ be a polynomial-time algorithm

$$ GenRSA(1^n) \to (N, e, d) $$

where $N$ is the product of two $n$-bit primes, and $e,d$ are integers s.t. $\mathrm{gcd}(e, \phi(N)) = 1$ and $ed = 1 \mod \phi(N)$.

Consider the following experiment

1. $GenRSA(1^n) \to (N, e, d)$. Choose a random $y \in Z_N^*$
2. $A(N,e,y) \to x \in Z_n^*$
3. Outputs 1 if $x^e = y \mod N$ and 0 o.w.

The RSA Assumption is that there exists an $GenRSA$ algorithm relative to which the RSA problem is hard.

- An instance of $GenRSA$
  1. $GenModulus(1^n) \to N, p, q$
  2. $\phi(N) = (p-1)(q-1)$
  3. Choose $e$ s.t. $\mathrm{gcd}(e, \phi(N)) = 1$
  4. $d = e^{-1} \mod \phi(N)$
  5. Return $(N, e, d)$

This is the textboox RSA algorithm

Note that $RSA \le_P Factoring$. If one can efficiently solve factoring, then it can solve RSA.

#### The Discrete Logarithm Assumption

**Discrete Logarithm.** Let $G$ be a cyclic group of order $q$ with generator $g$, $G = \{ g^0, g^1, \dots, g^{q-1} \}$. For every $h \in G$, there exists a unique $x \in Z_q$ s.t. $h = g^x$. We call this $x$ the **discrete logarithm** of $h$ w.r.t. $g$, $x = \log_g h$.

Let $GenGroup$ denote a generic polynomial-time algorithm

$$ GenGroup(1^n) \to (G, q, g) $$

where $G$ denotes a description of a group $G$, $q$ is its order $|q|=n$ and a generator $g \in G$. Here the description specifies how each element in the group is represented (uniquely) as bitstrings.

We require efficient algorithms for the group operation $\circ$ and determining whether a bitstring is a valid group element or not.

Consider the following experiment

1. $GenGroup(1^n) \to (G, q, g)$
2. $A(G,q,g,h) \to x \in Z_q$
3. Outputs 1 if $g^x = h$ and 0 o.w.

The discrete logarithm assumption is that there exists a $GenGroup$ relative to which the discrete logarithm problem is hard. I.e., it is difficult to find the discrete logarithm of an element in a group.

#### Diffie-Hellman Assumptions

Consider the following Computational Diffie-Hellman (CDH) experiment for $GenGroup$

1. $GenGroup(1^n) \to (G, q, g)$
2. Choose uniform $x_1, x_2 \in Z_q$ and set $h_1 = g^{x_1}, h_2 = g^{x_2}$
3. $A(G, q, g, h_1, h_2) \to h \in Z_q$
4. Outputs 1 if $h = g^{x_1x_2}$ and 0 o.w.

The CDH Assumption is that there exists a $GenGroup$ algo relative to which the CDH problem is hard

Consider the following Decisional Diffie-Hellman (DDH) experiment for $GenGroup$

1. $GenGroup(1^n) \to (G, q, g)$
2. Choose uniform $x_1, x_2 \in Z_q$ and set $h_1 = g^{x_1}, h_2 = g^{x_2}$
3. choose a random bit $b \in \{0,1\}$, if $b=0$, choose a uniform $h$, otherwise set $h = g^{x_1x_2}$
4. $A(G, q, g, h_1, h_2, h) \to b' \in \{0,1\}$
5. Outputs 1 if $b' = b$ and 0 o.w.

The DDH Assumption is that there exists a $GenGroup$ algo relative to which the DDH problem is hard

## Instances

### Public Key Encryption

- **Syntax.**
  - $KeyGen(\lambda) \to (pk, sk)$
  - $Enc(pk, m) \to c$
  - $Dec(sk, c) \to m$
- **Security.**
  - Chosen Plaintext Attack (CPA), Chosen Ciphertext Attack (CCA)

### Digital Signature

- **Syntax.**
  - $KeyGen(\lambda) \to (pk, sk)$
  - $Sign(sk, m) \to \sigma$
  - $Verify(pk, m, \sigma) \to 0,1$
- **Security model.**
  - **Existential Unforgeability (EUF, Strong EUF).** No PPT adversary can produce a fake but valid new (message, signature) pair.

### Public Key Encryption With Key-Privacy

- **Syntax.**
  - $Setup(\lambda) \to pp$, $pp$ will be an implicit input to all algos
  - $KeyGen(pp) \to (pk, sk)$
  - $Enc(pk, m) \to c$
  - $Dec(sk, c) \to m$
- **Security.**
  - Key-Indistinguishability CPA (IK-CPA), Key-Indistinguishability CCA (IK-CCA)

### Ring Signature

> Multiple users form a ring $R$. The adversary cannot identify the exact signer unless the adversary is also part of the original ring.

- **Syntax.**
  - $Setup(\lambda) \to pp$
  - $KeyGen(pp) \to (pk, sk)$
  - $Sign(pp, R, m, pk, sk) \to \sigma$
  - $Verify(pp, R, m, \sigma)$
- **Security.**
  - Unforgeability, Anonymity

### Linkable Ring Signature

> Less "private" setting where we can identify if two signatures are generated by the same $pk, sk$ pair

- **Syntax.**
  - $Setup(\lambda) \to pp$
  - $KeyGen(pp) \to (pk, sk)$
  - $Sign(pp, R, m, pk, sk) \to \sigma$
  - $Verify(pp, R, m, \sigma)$
  - $Link(pp, R_1, m_1, \sigma_1, R_2, M_2, \sigma_2) \to 0,1$
- **Security.**
  - Unforgeability, Anonymity, Linkability, Non-Slanderability
