# El Gammal Encryption: A Public Key Encryption Scheme

## Construction of El Gammal

### Key Generation

$\mathrm{KeyGen}(1^\lambda) \to (pk, sk)$.

- On input $q^\lambda$, the algorithm runs $\mathrm{GenGroup}(1^\lambda)$ to obtain $(G, q, g)$.
- Then it chooses a random $x \in Z_q$ and computes $h = g^x$. This essentially samples a uniform $h$ from the group.

The public and private keys are given by

$$ pk = (G, q, g, h), \quad sk = (G, q, g, x) $$

### Encryption

$\mathrm{Enc}(pk,m) \to c$.

- On input a public key $pk = (G, q, g, h)$ and a message $m \in G$ (message space $M = G$)
- The algorithm chooses a uniform $y \in Z_q$ and outputs ciphertext $(g^y, m \cdot h^y)$.

### Decryption

$\mathrm{Dec}(sk, c) \to m$.

- On input $pk=(G, q, g, x)$ and $c = (c_1, c_2) \in G^2$,
- Output $m = c_2 \cdot (c_1^x)^{-1}$.

## Proof of Correctness

## Proof of Security

> Typically the security is proved by contradiction: if the scheme is insecure, then some of the hardness assumptions must fail.

**Theorem.** If the DDH problem is hard relative to $\mathrm{GenGroup}$, then the El Gamal Encryption Scheme is CPA-secure.

*Sketch of Proof.* Suppose there is a PPT adversary $A$ such that $\mathrm{Adv}_{\Pi, A}^{CPA} > \epsilon$ for non-negligible probability $\epsilon$. We show that we can construct a PPT algorithm $B$ to solve the DDH Problem relative to $\mathrm{GenGroup}$ with non-negligible probability.

### Setup Stage

- $\mathbf{B}$ receives a DDH problem instance, $(G, q, g, A, B, T)$, where $A = g^\alpha, B = g^\beta$ for some $\alpha, \beta \in Z_q^*$ and $T \in G$. $\mathbf{B}$'s target is to determine whether $T = g^{\alpha\beta}$ (or $T$ is just some random number).
- $\mathbf{B}$ sets $h=A$ and gives $pk = (G, q, g, h)$ to $\mathbf{A}$.
  - Here $\mathbf{B}$ constructs a public key $(G, q, g, A)$ using $A$ from the DDH problem instance.
  - This public key is valid, but $\mathbf{B}$ does not have the corresponding private key pair.

**Note.** We can safely assume that the adversary cannot tell whether $T$ is a valid ciphertext ($T=g^{\alpha\beta}$) or not. If the adversary were able to distinguish $T_0 = g^{\alpha\beta}$ and $T_1 = g^c$, then we would also be able to solve DDH problem (the adversary solves it by distinguishing $T_0, T_1$).

### Challenge Stage

- $\mathbf{A}$ submits $m_0^*, m_1^* \in G$ s.t. $m_0^* \neq m_1^*$.
- $\mathbf{B}$ randomly chooses $b = \{0,1\}$ and set $c_1 = B, c_2 = m_b^* \cdot T$.
  - $B = g^\beta$. $\mathbf{B}$ does not know $\beta$, but it can pretend it does, and send $B$ as $c_1$.
  - Note that if $T = g^{\alpha\beta}$, then the returned ciphertext is also a valid El Gammal ciphertext.
- $\mathbf{B}$ returns $c^* = (c_1, c_2)$ to $\mathbf{A}$.

### Output Stage

- $\mathbf{A}$ sends $b' \in \{0, 1\}$ to $\mathbf{B}$.
- $\mathbf{B}$ sets $z' = 1$ if $b' = b$, otherwise $z' = 0$.
- $\mathbf{B}$ outputs $z'$ as its solution to the DDH Problem.

### Analysis

### Remarks

- Basic workflow of a proof
  1. Assume such an adversary exists.
  2. Use the adversary's ability to solve a hard problem.
  3. Provide analysis on the probability of solving the problem.
- From the adversary's perspective, it sees exactly what it expects to see under an El Gammal Scheme, *provided $T = g^{\alpha\beta}$* holds.
- The construction of the proof should leverage both the ability of the adversary and the information provided by the hard problem.
- For the proof itself, it must ensure
  - The game procedure follows the definition of security (CPA in this case).
  - The adversary should see exactly what it is supposed to see in the adversary game (valid public keys and ciphertexts in this case). Or it should at least be unable to distinguish valid and invalid responses.
