# Attribute Based Encryption (ABE)

## Introduction

- IBE. In IBE, the secret key $sk_{ID}$ is based on the user's $ID$.
  - One-to-one. Each $sk_{ID}$ corresponds to one single user, identified by its $ID$.
- Fuzzy IBE. Allows non-exact matches (e.g., fingerprint).
- Ciphertext-Policy Attribute-Based Encryption (CP-ABE). Provides an access policy for the ciphertext.
  - One-to-more. Allows multiple users to decrypt the message.
  - E.g., "Dept. of CS AND (Phd OR Alumni)".
- Broadcast Encryption. Broadcast a ciphertext to a group of people, identified by the IDs.
  - Also one-to-more.
  - Different from ABE, BE requires knowing *all* IDs of the receivers in advance.
  - ABE only requires attributes instead of unique IDs.

### Collusion Resistance

- Assume two users, `{EE, PhD, Bill}` and `{CS, UnG, Carl}`.
- Neither of the two satisfies the access policy `{CS, PhD OR Alumni}`.
- But two of them combined will satisfy the policy.
- ABE schemes should be resilient to such collusion.

### Ciphertext-Policy ABE (CP-ABE)

The encrypted data is associated with an access policy. Users' keys are generated based on the attributes of the user. A user can decrypt the message iff its attributes satisfies the access policy of the ciphertext.

CP-ABE does not need to know or specify *identities* of potential receivers. The attributes are associated with the receivers.

- A decryption key is described by an **attribute set**.
- A ciphertext is associated with an **access policy**.

### Key-Policy ABE (KP-ABE)

The data is encrypted by its attributes. Users' keys are generated based on their access policy. A user can decrypt the message iff the attribute of the data satisfies the access policy of the user.

- The attributes are associated with the data. 

E.g., consider a TV broadcasting service. Assume a video stream is associated with `{Basketball, 2024, March}`. The encrypted file is broadcasted and users who have subscribed to `Basketball` can decrypt it.
