# Basic Set Theory

## An Intuitive Overview

### Set

(Informally) A **set** is a collection of objects that acts as a single entity.

#### Set Reasoning

For any object $a$ and any set $X$, either $a \in X$ or $a \notin X$, but not both.

## The Language of Set Theory

### Notations

- **Names.** $a_0, a_1,\dots,A_0,A_1$.
- **Variables.** $x_0, x_1, \dots$.
- **Logic Connectives.** $\neg, \&, \mathrm{or}, \Rightarrow, \Leftrightarrow, \exists, \forall$.
  - NOTE. For simplicity we will use $\land$ for $\&$ and $\lor$ for $\mathrm{or}$.

### Formulas

- **Atomic Formulas.** An atomic formula has the form $x = y$ or $x \in y$.
  - Here $x, y$ are names or variables.
  - Atomic formulae evaluates to either true or false, depending on whether the formula holds, when the meaning of $x,y$ are clear.
- **Boolean connectives.**
  - If $\phi$ is a formula, then so is $\neg \phi$.
  - If $\phi_1, \phi_2$ are formulas, then so are $\phi_1 \land \phi_2, \phi_1 \lor \phi_2, \phi_1 \Rightarrow \phi_2, \phi_1 \Leftrightarrow \phi_2$.
- **Quantifiers.**
  - If $\phi$ is a formula and $x$ is a variable, then $\forall x.\phi$ and $\exists x.\phi$ are formulas.

## Axiomatic Set Theory, Informally

### Why Axiomatic Set Theory

The liberal way of describing sets leads to the Russell's Paradox. Consider "the set of all sets"

$$ R = \{ x | x \notin x \}. $$

If we assume $R \in R$, then we will have $R \notin R$, which leads to a contradiction.

We need to discipline the way in which sets are constructed, so that starting from certain given sets, new sets can only be formed by using particular, safe ways from existing sets.

### Set Construction

Any set can be constructed from the empty set through a finite number of axioms.

#### Empty Set Axiom

We take the existence of the empty set for granted.

$$ \exists B.(\forall x. x \notin B). $$

The empty set is denoted by $\emptyset$.

The empty set is unique,

$$ \forall A \forall B.[(\forall x. x \notin A) \land (\forall x. x \notin B) \Rightarrow A = B]. $$

#### Subset Theorem and Set Comprehension

For any set $A$, for any sets $t_1,\dots,t_n$, for any formula $\phi(x, y_1,\dots,y_n)$, there exists a set $B$ such that

$$ \forall x.(x \in B \Leftrightarrow x \in A \land \phi(x, t_1,\dots,t_n)). $$

##### Set Comprehension

If $X$ is a set and $P(x)$ is a property (i.e., a formula involving variable $x$), we can form the set

$$\{ x \in X | P(x) \}.$$

The subset of $X$ containing all elements $x$ of $X$ which satisfy $P(x)$.

#### Pairing Axiom and Set Product

$$ \forall u. \forall v. \exists B. [\forall x.(x \in B \Leftrightarrow x = u \lor x = v)]. $$

Denoted by $B = \{ u, v \}$.

##### Ordered Pairs

Given two elements $a,b$, we can form a set $(a,b)$ which is their ordered pair. The ordered pair can be defined as

$$ (a, b) = \{ \{a\}, \{ a, b \} \}. $$

- $(x_1, y_1) = (x_2, y_2)$ iff $x_1 = x_2$ and $y_1 = y_2$.

##### Set Product

For sets $X, Y$, their product is the set

$$ X \times Y = \{ (a, b) | a \in X \land b \in Y \}. $$

A more formal (and less readable) definition is

$$ A \times B = \{ w \in 2^{2^{A \cup B}} | \exists x. \exists y.(w = (x,y) \land x \in A \land y \in B) \}. $$

#### Union Axioms

$$ \forall A. \forall B. \exists C. [\forall x.(x \in C \Leftrightarrow x \in A \lor x \in B)]. $$

$$ \forall \mathcal{A}. \exists B. [\forall x.(x \in B \Leftrightarrow \exists A \in \mathcal{A}. x \in A)]. $$

##### Set Union

The set consisting of the union of two sets has as elements those elements which are either element of one or the other set.

$$X \cup Y = \{ a | a \in X \lor a \in Y \}.$$

##### Big Union

Let $X$ be a set of sets, their union

$$\bigcup X = \{ a | \exists x.a \in x \}$$

is a set.

When $X = \{ x_i | i \in I \}$ for some index set $I$ we write $\bigcup_{i \in I} X$.

#### Power Set Axiom

$$ \forall A. \exists B. [\forall x. x \in B \Leftrightarrow x \subseteq A]. $$

We can form a set consisting of the set of all subsets of a set, the **powerset**,

$$\mathcal{P}(X) = \{ Y | Y \subseteq X \}.$$

#### Other Set Operations

- **Index sets.** Suppose $I$ is a set and for any $i \in I$ there is a unique object $x_i$, maybe a set itself. Then $\{ x_i | i \in I \}$ is a set. The elements $x_i$ are said to be indexed by the elements $i \in I$.
- **Intersection.** Elements are in the intersection $X \cap Y$ of two sets $X,Y$ iff they are in both sets, $X \cap Y = \{ a | a \in X \land a \in Y \}$.
- **Big Intersection.** Let $X$ be a non-empty set of sets, then $\bigcap X = \{ a | \forall x \in X.a \in x \}$ is a set called its intersection.
- **Disjoint Union.** $A \uplus B = (\{ 0 \} \times A) \cup (\{ 1 \} \times B) $.
- **Set Difference.** $X \backslash Y = \{ x | x \in X \land x \notin Y \}$.

### Axioms for Set Reasoning

#### Extensionality Axiom

$$ \forall A \forall B.[\forall x.(x \in A \Leftrightarrow x \in B) \Rightarrow A = B]. $$

If two sets $A,B$ have exactly the same members, then they are equal.

#### Set Inclusion

Given two sets $A, B$, we write

$$ A \subseteq B $$

if 

$$ \forall x.(x \in A \Rightarrow x \in B). $$

**Property.** For any two sets $A, B$, $A = B$ iff $A \subseteq B$ and $B \subseteq A$.

#### The Axiom of Foundation (Regularity)

$$ \forall A.[A \neq \emptyset \Rightarrow \exists B.(B \in A \land B \cap A = \emptyset)]. $$

Intuitively, since a set is builtup from basic sets using the axioms and operations stated above, it follows that if $b_1$ is a (non-empty) set, it must have been constructed from sets which themselves have been constructed earlier.

We expect the chain

$$ \cdots b_n \in \cdots \in b_1 \in b_0 $$

to end in some $b_n$ which is either some basic set element or the empty set.

**Corollary.** $\forall A. A \notin A$. Or otherwise we would be able to construct an infinite sequence, conflicting the axiom of foundation.

**Corollary.** There is no infinite sequence $A_0, A_1,\dots$ such that $\cdots \in A_n \in \cdots \in A_1 \in A_0$.

### Russell's Paradox

$$ X = \{ x| x\notin x \} $$

conceptually exists, but it is not a set.

### Inductive Sets and Natural Numbers

#### Natural Numbers

Natural numbers can be defined as

- $0: \emptyset$,
- $1: \emptyset \cup \{ \emptyset \}$,
- $n^+ : n \cup \{n\}$ for any natural number $n$, where $n^+$ denotes the number immediately following $n$.

#### Inductive Sets

A set $A$ is **inductive** if $\emptyset \in A$ and for any $a \in A, a^+ = a \cup \{ a \} \in A$.

The set of natural numbers is the smallest inductive set. Let $A$ be any inductive set,

$$ \omega = \mathbb{N} = \{ n \in A | \forall B. (B \text{ is inductive} \Rightarrow n \in B) \}. $$

#### Infinity Axiom

There exsits an inductive set such that

$$ \exists A. [\emptyset \in A \land (\forall a.a \in A \Rightarrow a^+ \in A)]. $$

## Relations and Functions

### Relations

A **relation** $R$ is a set of ordered pairs $(x, y)$. $(x, y) \in R$ means $x,y$ are related by $R$ in order, denoted by $xRy$.

A **binary relation** between sets $X$ and $Y$ is a subset $R \subseteq X \times Y$

#### Images

The **direct image** of a set $X$ under relation $R$ is defined as, for any $A \subseteq X$,

$$ R(A) \coloneqq \{ y \in Y \mid \exists x \in A.xRy \}. $$

The **inverse image** is defined similarly, for any $B \subseteq Y$,

$$ R^{-1}(B) \coloneqq \{ x \in X \mid \exists y\in B. xRy \}. $$

#### Composition

Let $R$ be a relation between $X$ and $Y$, $S$ be a relation between $Y$ and $Z$, the **composition** of $R$ and $S$ is a relation between $X$ and $Z$

$$ S \circ R \coloneqq \{ (x,z) \in X \times Z \mid \exists y \in Y. (x,y)\in R \text{ \& } (y,z) \in S \}. $$

#### Closures

Denote

- $R^0 = Id_R \coloneqq \{ (x, y) \in X \times X \mid x = y \}$
- $R^{n+1} = R \circ R^n$

Define the **transitive closure**

$$ R^+ \coloneqq \bigcup_n R^{n+1}. $$

The transitive closure is transitive,

$$ \forall x,y,z \in X. (xR^+y \text{ \& } yR^+z \Rightarrow xR^+z) $$

Define the **reflexive transitive closure**

$$ R^* \coloneqq \bigcup_n R^n $$

$R^*$ is in addition reflexive,

$$ \forall x \in X. xR^* x. $$

#### Equivalence Relation

A relation $R \subseteq X \times X$ is an **equivalence relation** on $X$ if it is

1. **reflexivity.** $\forall x \in X. xRx$.
2. **symmetry.** $\forall x,y \in X.(xRy \Leftrightarrow yRx)$
3. **transitivity.** $\forall x,y,z \in X.(xRy \text{ \& } yRz \Rightarrow xRz)$.

For any $a \in X$, the **equivalence class** of $a$ is defined by

$$ [a]_R \coloneqq \{ x \in X \mid xRa \} $$

#### Partial Orders

A relation $R \subseteq X \times X$ is a **partial order** on $X$ if

1. **reflexivity.** $\forall x \in X. xRx$.
2. **antisymmetry.** $\forall x,y \in X.(xRy \text{ \& } yRx \Rightarrow x=y)$
3. **transitivity.** $\forall x,y,z \in X.(xRy \text{ \& } yRz \Rightarrow xRz)$.

### Functions

A **function** is a mapping that assigns to each element in $X$ a *unique* element in $Y$.

#### Partial Function

A **partial function** $F$ from $X$ to $Y$ is a *binary relation* $F \subseteq X \times Y$ s.t.

$$ \forall x\in X.\forall y, y' \in Y.[xFy \text{ \& } xFy' \Rightarrow y =y'] $$

- $F(x)$ denotes that unique $y$, if it exists.

#### Total Function

A **total function** $F$ is a partial function such that for any $x \in X$ there exists $y \in Y$ s.t. $xFy$.

- Intuitively, a total function is *defined* on every $x \in X$.

#### Inverse

A function $F: X \mapsto Y$ has an **inverse** $G: Y \mapsto X$ if

- $G(F(x)) = x$ for all $x \in X$,
- $F(G(y)) = y$ for all $y \in Y$

If there exists a function $F: X \mapsto  Y$ with its inverse $G: Y \mapsto  X$, then $X,Y$ are in **1-1 correspondence**.

### Cantor's Diagonal Argument

Let $X$ be a set, $X$ and $2^X$ are *not* in 1-1 correspondence.