# Some Principles of Induction

## Mathematical Induction

### Mathematical Induction

Let $P(n)$ be a property on natural numbers. The principle of mathematical induction states that in order to show $P(n)$ holds on all natural numbers, it is sufficient to show that

- $P(0)$ is true.
- If $P(m)$ is true, then so is $P(m+1)$ for any natural number $m$.
- **Induction basis.** $P(0)$.
- **Induction hypothesis.** $P(m)$.
- **Induction step.** $\forall m \in \mathbb{N}. P(m) \Rightarrow P(m+1)$.

$$ [P(0) \land \forall n \in \mathbb{N}.(P(n) \Rightarrow P(n+1))] \Rightarrow \forall n \in \mathbb{N}.P(n). $$

*Proof.*

1. Let $P = \{ n \in \mathbb{N} | P(n)  \} \subseteq \mathbb{N}$.
2. $P$ is an inductive set: $0 \in P$ and $n \in P \Rightarrow n + 1 \in P$.
3. $\mathbb{N}$ is the smallest inductive set: $\mathbb{N} \subseteq P$.
4. We thus have $\mathbb{N} \subseteq P \land P \subseteq \mathbb{N}$: $\mathbb{N} = P$. That is, $\forall n \in \mathbb{N}.P(n)$

### Course-of-Values Induction

For a property $P(m)$, it is sometimes sensible to strengthen $P(m)$ to an induction basis $Q(m): \forall k < m.P(k)$.

- **Target.** $\forall n. P(n)$.
- **Variant.** $Q(n) = \forall k < n. P(k)$.
- **Equivalence.** $\forall n.P(n)$ is equivalent to $\forall n.Q(n)$.
- **Induction basis.** $Q(0)$ is vacuously true.
- **Induction step.** $Q(n) \Rightarrow Q(n+1)$.
  - I.e., $(\forall k < n.P(k)) \Rightarrow P(n)$ for all $n$.

## Well-Founded Induction

Mathematical induction and structural induction (to be covered later) are special cases of a general proof principle called **well-founded induction**.

### Well-Founded Relation

A **well-founded relation** is a binary relation $\prec$ on a set $A$ if there is no infinite descending sequence $\cdot \prec a_n \prec \cdots \prec a_1 \prec a_0$ in $A$.

- A well-founded relation is necessarily irreflexible, $\forall a \in A. a \nprec a$.

#### Condition for Well-Foundedness

**Minimal Elements.** Let $A$ be a set and $\prec$ be a binary relation on $A$. Let $Q \subseteq A$ be a subset of $A$ and $u \in Q$ be an element in $Q$. The element $u$ is a **minimal element** in $Q$ if

$$ \forall v \in Q. (v \nprec u). $$

**Proposition.** The relation $\prec$ is well-founded iff any nonempty subset $Q \subseteq A$ has a minimal element.

*Proof*

- $\Rightarrow$ (By contradiction).
  - Suppose there is a subset with no minimal element, $\forall u \in Q.\exists v \in Q. v \prec u$.
  - We can then construct an inifinitely descending sequence.
- $\Leftarrow$ (By contradiction).
  - Suppose $\prec$ is not well-founded.
  - There exists an infinite sequence $\cdots \prec a_n \prec \cdots \prec a_1 \prec a_0$.
  - The set $\{ a_0,a_1,\dots,a_n,\dots \}$ will not contain any minimal element.

### Well-Founded Induction

Let $A$ be a set, $\prec$ be a binary relation on $A$ and $P$ be a property of elements in $A$. The principle

$$ \forall a \in A.P(a) \Longleftrightarrow \forall a \in A.[(\forall b \prec a).P(b) \Rightarrow P(a)]. $$

To prove a property holds of all elements of a well-founded set it suffices to show that if the property holds for all predecessors of an arbitrary element $a$, then the property holds of $a$.

*Proof.*

- $\Rightarrow$. Straightforward.
- $\Leftarrow$ (By contradiction).
  - Suppose $\exists a.\neg P(a)$, let $Q = \{ a | \neg P(a) \}$.
  - $Q$ is nonempty and has a minimal element $a^*$.
  - $\forall b \prec a^*.b \notin Q$ and therefore $\forall b \prec a^*. P(b)$.
  - From $\forall b\prec a^*.P(b)$ we have $P(a^*)$.
  - $a^* \in P$ and $a^* \notin P$.

## Structural Induction

Structural induction could be applied to syntax structures and prove facts like

$$ \langle a, \sigma \rangle \to m \land \langle a,\sigma \rangle \to m' \Rightarrow m = m', $$

which states that the evaluation of arithmetic expressions is deterministic.

The basic idea is to show that

- $P$ holds for the atomic elements (constants and variables for $\mathbf{Aexp}$).
- $P$ is preserved by all methods of forming new elements (arithmetic operations for for $\mathbf{Aexp}$).

### Proof of Determinisitics

#### Arithmetic Expressions

$$ \langle a, \sigma \rangle \to m \land \langle a,\sigma \rangle \to m' \Rightarrow m = m'. $$

- Define $\prec$: $a_0 \prec a_1$ iff $a_0$ is an immediate syntactical child of $a_1$.
- **Base.** $P$ holds at atomic arithmetic expressions $n, X$.
- **Inductive step.** If $P$ holds for $a_0, a_1$, then $P$ also holds at $a_0 + a_1, a_0 - a_1, a_0 \times a_1$.

#### Boolean Expressions

$$ \langle b, \sigma \rangle \to t \land \langle b,\sigma \rangle \to t' \Rightarrow t = t'. $$

The proof is similar.

#### Commands

$$ \langle c, \sigma \rangle \to \sigma_1 \land \langle c,\sigma \rangle \to \sigma_2 \Rightarrow \sigma_1 = \sigma_2. $$

This prosposition is true. However, it cannot be proved by structural induction. Specifically, consider the while loop,

$$ \frac{\langle b,\sigma \rangle \to true \quad \langle c, \sigma \rangle \to \sigma'' \quad \langle \texttt{while } b \texttt{ do } c, \sigma'' \rangle (\ast) \to \sigma'}{\langle \texttt{while } b \texttt{ do } c, \sigma \rangle (\star) \to \sigma'} $$

We cannot say whether $(\ast) \prec (\star)$ because they are not necessarily syntactic children of each other.

## Induction on Derivations

Often it is useful to do induction on the structure of derivations.

### Rule Instances

Possible derivations are determined by instances of rules.

**Rule Instances.** A **rule instance** has the general form of $(X/y)$, where $X = \{x_1,\dots,x_n\}$ are called the **premises** and $y$ is called the conclusion.

$$ \frac{x_1, \dots, x_n}{y} $$

**Axiom Rule Instances.** An axiom rule instance $\emptyset/y$ is a rule instance without premises.

$$ \frac{}{y} $$

### Derivation Trees

Let $R$ be a set of rule instances. An **$R$-Derivation** of an element $y$ is either a rule instance $\emptyset/y$ or a pair $\{d_1,\dots,d_n\}/y$ where $\{x_1,\dots,x_n\}/y$ is a rule instance and each $d_i$ is an $R$-derivation of $x_i$.

- **Notations.**
  - $d \Vdash_R y, d \Vdash y$: $d$ is an $R$-derivation of $y$.
  - $\Vdash_R y, \Vdash y$: $d \Vdash_R y$ for some derivation $d$.
- We then have
  - $(\emptyset/y) \Vdash_R y$ if $(\emptyset/y) \in R$.
  - $(\{ d_1,\dots,d_n \}/y) \Vdash_R y$ if $(\{x_1,\dots,x_n\}/y) \in R$ and $d_1 \Vdash_R x_1, \dots d_n \Vdash_R x_n$.

### Induction on Derivation Trees

- Let $A$ be the set of all derivation trees.
- Let $\prec: r_0 \prec r_1$ iff $r_0$ is a proper sub-derivation tree of $r_1$.

$$ [\forall r \in A.((\forall r' \prec r. P(r)) \Rightarrow P(r))] \Rightarrow \forall r \in A. P(r) $$
