# Inductive Definitions

## Rule Induction

We are interested in defining a set by rules. Given a set of rule instances $R$, we write $I_R$ for the set defined by $R$ consisting of those elements $y$ for which there is a derivation.

$$ I_R = \{ y \in E | \Vdash_R y \}. $$

The principle of **rule induction** is useful to show a property is true for all the elements in a set defined by some rules.

### The General Principle of Rule Induction

$$ \forall x \in I_R.P(x) \Longleftrightarrow \forall (X/y) \in R.[(X \subseteq I_R \land \forall x \in X.P(x)) \Rightarrow P(y)]. $$

- **Intuition.**
  - If a property is preserved in moving from the premises to the conclusion of all rule instances in a derivation,
  - Then the conclusion of the derivation has the property.
  - Hence the property is true for all elements in the set defined by the rules.
- **Base step.** Cases when $X = \emptyset$ (Axioms).
- **Inductive step.** Cases when $X \neq \emptyset$.

We now work on the proof of this principle. To begin with, we will introduce a few concepts.

### Closedness

A set $Q$ is **closed** under rule instances $R$, or **$R$-closed**, iff

$$ \forall (X/y) \in R.(X \subseteq R \Rightarrow y \in Q). $$

I.e., a set $Q$ is closed under $R$ if whenever the premises of any rule instances lie in this set, then so does its conclusion.

**Proposition.** Let $R$ be a set of rule instances, and $Q$ be a set of elements, we have

- $I_R$ is $R$-closed.
- If $Q$ is an $R$-closed set then $I_R \subseteq Q$.

That is, $I_R$ is the smallest set that is $R$-closed.

*Proof.*

1. Can be proved by definition of $I_R$.
   - Let $(X/y) \in R$ be a rule instance and $X \subseteq R$.
   - Assume $X$ is nonempty.
   - Each $x_i$ in $X$ has a derivation by definition of $I_R$.
   - Combining the derivations for $x_i$'s and $(X/y)$ yields a derivation for $y$.
   - Hence $y \in I_R$.
2. Can be proved by an induction on derivation tree and show that
   - $\forall y \in I_R. d \Vdash_R y \Rightarrow y \in Q.$

Therefore to show the elements in $I_R$ have some property $P()$ it suffices to show that the set $Q = \{ x | P(x) \}$ is $R$-closed.

- If $Q$ is $R$-closed, then $I_R \subseteq Q$ by proposition (2) and therefore $\forall x \in I_R.P(x)$.

### Proof of Rule Induction Principle

Suppose we want to prove a property $P$ holds for all elements in the set defined by rules $R$. Let

$$ Q = \{ x \in I_R | P(x) \} \subseteq I_R.$$

The goal is to show $I_R \subseteq Q$, so that $I_R = Q$, i.e., all elements in $I_R$ satisfies $P$.

By condition (2) in the proposition, we only need to show $Q$ is $R$-closed,

$$ \forall (X/y) \in R.(X \subseteq R \Rightarrow y \in Q). $$

Or equivalently

$$ \forall (X/y) \in R.[(\forall x \in X. x \in I_R \land P(x)) \Rightarrow P(y)], $$

which is exactly what the induction step aims to prove.

The argument above essentially shows that

$$\forall (X/y) \in R.[(\forall x \in X. x \in I_R \land P(x)) \Rightarrow P(y)] \Longrightarrow \forall x \in I_R.P(x).$$

Note that the opposite direction is straightforward. Therefore this completes the proof on the principle of rule induction.

## Special Rule Inductions

- **General Rule Induction.** A property for *all* elements.
- **Special Rule Induction.** A property for *a part of* elements.

Imagine proving a property on the set of commands $\mathbf{Com}$. We would end up having to prove this property on arithmetic and boolean expressions as well because commands are made up of expressions.

A modified principle of rule induction is required for establishing properties of *subsets* of the set defined by rules.

### Special Principle of Rule Induction

- $R$: A set of rule instances.
- $A \subseteq I_R$: A subset of $I_R$.
- $Q$: A predicate over $I_R$.

We have $\forall a \in A.Q(a)$ if and only if

$$ \forall (X/y)\in R.[(X \subseteq I_R \land y \in A \land (\forall x \in X \cap A.Q(x))) \Rightarrow Q(y)]. $$

#### Proof of Special Principle of Rule Induction

- $\Longrightarrow$ is straightforward.
- $\Longleftarrow$. Prove with the general principle.

Assume RHS of the principle holds. Define $P(x): x \in A \Rightarrow Q(x)$. We then have

$$ \forall a \in I_R.P(a) \Leftrightarrow \forall a \in A. P(a). $$

Apply general rule induction on $\forall x \in I_R. P(x).$

$$ \forall x \in I_R.P(x) \Longleftrightarrow \forall (X/y) \in R.[(X \subseteq I_R \land P(X)) \Rightarrow P(y)]. $$

Expand $P(x)$,

$$ \forall x \in I_R.P(x) \Longleftrightarrow \forall (X/y) \in R.[(X \subseteq I_R \land \forall x \in X.(x \in A \Rightarrow Q(x))) \Rightarrow (y \in A \Rightarrow Q(y))]. $$

RHS is equivalent to

$$ \forall (X/y) \in R.[(X \subseteq I_R \land \forall x \in \underline{X \cap A} \Rightarrow Q(x)) \Rightarrow (y \in A \Rightarrow Q(y))] $$

and extracting $y \in A$, (by $p \Rightarrow (q \Rightarrow r) \Leftrightarrow p \land q \Rightarrow r$)

$$ \forall(X/y) \in R.[(X \subseteq I_R \land y \in A \land \forall x \in X \cap A.Q(x)) \Rightarrow Q(y)] $$

Note that this is exactly the RHS of the principle, so we are done.

## Inductive Definitions

### Intuition

Let $A$ be a non-empty set, $h: A \mapsto A$ be a function and $a \in A$ be an initial element. We can construct an infinite sequence using the initial element and $h()$: $a_0, a_1, \dots$ where $a_0 = a$ and $a_{n+1} = h(a_n)$.

### Recursion Theorem

**Recursion Theorem.** Let $A$ be a non-empty set, $h: A \mapsto A$ be a function and $a \in A$ be an initial element. There exists a *unique* function $f: \mathbb{N} \mapsto A$ such that $f(0) = a$ and $f(n+1) = h(f(n))$.

Basically, given an initial element, we construct each successor element by its previous element and a function $h$, then the resulting set is unique.

### Inductive Definition on Derivation Trees

Let $R$ be a set of rule instances. Then we have

- $D_0 \coloneqq \{ (X/y)  \in R | X = \emptyset\}$.
- $d \in D_{n+1}$ iff
  - either $d \in D_n$. (**Note.** The original slide write $d \in D_0$.)
  - or $d = \{ d_1,\dots,d_n \}/y$ for some $d_1,\dots,d_n \in D_n$ and $(x_1,\dots,x_n)/y \in R$ such that $d_i$ is rooted at $x_i$.
- $D = \bigcup_n D_n$.

### Inductive Definition on $I_R$

Let $E$ be a set of elements and $R$ be a set of rule instances, where all elements are from $E$.

Define

$$ \widehat{R}: 2^E \mapsto 2^E: \widehat{R}(B) \coloneqq \{ y \in E | \exists X \subseteq B.(X/y) \in R \}. $$

$B$ can be interpreted as "the premises that are derivable for now (by applying a finite number of rules)".

- $A \subseteq B \Rightarrow \widehat{R}(A) \subseteq \widehat{R}(B)$. I.e., $\widehat{R}()$ is monotonic.
- Let $A_0 \coloneqq \emptyset, A_{n+1} \coloneqq \widehat{R}(A_n)$.
- We thus have $A_0 \subseteq A_1 \subseteq \cdots \subseteq A_n \subseteq \cdots$.
- $I_R = \bigcup_n A_n$.

We can prove the two propositions under this new definition.

1. $I_R$ is $R$-closed.
2. If $Q$ is $R$-closed, then $I_R \subseteq Q$.

*Proof of Proposition 1.* Consider $(X/y) \in R$ and $X \subseteq I_R$.

By definition of $I_R$,

$$ \exists n. X \subseteq A_n \text{ and } y \in A_{n+1} \subseteq I_R $$

Thus we are done.

*Proof of Proposition 2.* If $Q$ is $R$-closed, then $I_R \subseteq Q$. Prove by induction on $n$ and show that $\forall n.A_n \subseteq Q$.

- **Base step.** $A_0 = \emptyset \subseteq Q$.
- **Induction step.** Assume $A_n \subseteq Q$. $A_{n+1} = \widehat{R}(A_n)$. By definition of $\widehat{R}$ we know that $A_{n+1} \subseteq Q$.

## Examples

### Example#1 (Special Rule Induction)

Let $Y$ be a program variable,

$$ \forall c, \sigma, \sigma'.[(Y \notin \mathrm{loc}(c) \land \langle c, \sigma \rangle \to \sigma') \Rightarrow \sigma(Y) = \sigma'(Y)]. $$

That is, if the program does not use variable $Y$, it will not change the variable's content.

*Proof.* Let

$$ A \coloneqq \{ \langle c, \sigma \rangle \to \sigma' | Y \notin \mathrm{loc}(c) \}, \quad Q(c, \sigma, \sigma') \coloneqq \sigma(Y) = \sigma(Y)'. $$

The goal is

$$ \forall \langle c, \sigma \rangle \to \sigma' \in A. Q(c, \sigma, \sigma'). $$

$$ \forall (X/y) \in R.[(X \subseteq I_R \land y \in A \land (\forall x \in X \cap A.Q(x))) \Rightarrow Q(y)] $$

**Base step.**

$$ \dfrac{}{\langle \texttt{skip}, \sigma \rangle \to \sigma} $$

It is straightforward that $\sigma(Y) = \sigma(Y)$.

**Inductive steps.**

We consider a few cases.

$$ \dfrac{\langle a, \sigma \rangle \to m}{\langle X \coloneqq a, \sigma \rangle \to \sigma[m/X]} $$

Note that since $Y \notin \mathrm{loc}(c)$, we have $X \neq Y$. Therefore $\sigma(Y) = \sigma[m/X](Y)$.

$$ \dfrac{\dfrac{}{\langle b, \sigma \rangle \to true} \quad \dfrac{}{\langle c, \sigma \rangle \to \sigma''} \quad \dfrac{}{\langle \texttt{while } b \texttt{ do } c, \sigma'' \rangle \to \sigma'}}{\langle \texttt{while } b \texttt{ do } c, \sigma \rangle \to \sigma'} $$

Note that by induction hypothesis, we have $\sigma''(Y) = \sigma(Y)$ and $\sigma''(Y) = \sigma'(Y)$. Hence $\sigma(Y) = \sigma'(Y)$.

The other cases are similar.

### Example#2 (Special Rule Induction)

Let

$$ w \coloneqq \texttt{while } true \texttt{ do } \texttt{skip}. $$

Prove that

$$ \forall \sigma, \sigma'. \langle w, \sigma \rangle \nrightarrow \sigma' $$

(That is basically this program does not halt.)

*Proof.* Define

$$ A \coloneqq \{ (c, \sigma, \sigma') | \langle c, \sigma \rangle \to \sigma' \land c= w \} $$

We define $Q \coloneqq false$, which means $A = \emptyset$. To show this, we aim to prove

$$ \forall a \in A. Q(a). $$

$$ \forall (X/y) \in R.[(X \subseteq I_R \land y \in A \land (\forall x \in X \cap A.Q(x))) \Rightarrow Q(y)]. $$

We only need to consider one single rule

$$ \dfrac{\dfrac{}{\langle b, \sigma \rangle \to true} \quad \dfrac{}{\langle c, \sigma \rangle \to \sigma''} \quad \dfrac{}{\langle \texttt{while } b \texttt{ do } c, \sigma'' \rangle \to \sigma'} (\star)}{\langle \texttt{while } b \texttt{ do } c, \sigma \rangle \to \sigma'} $$

By the induction hypothesis, we know that $Q$ holds for $(\star)$. It then follows that $\langle \texttt{while } true \texttt{ do } \texttt{skip}, \sigma \rangle \to \sigma'$ is also $false$. Therefore $\forall a \in A.Q(a)$.

#### From the Perspective of Inductive Definition

We can use inductive definitions and prove by contradiction.

*Proof.* Suppose $\exists \sigma, \sigma'.\langle w, \sigma \rangle \to \sigma'$. We thus have $(w, \sigma, \sigma') \in A_n$ for some $n$, where $A_n$ is derived by the syntactic rules of IMP.

Let $n^*$ be the smallest $n$ s.t. $(w, \sigma, \sigma') \in A_{n^*}$. However,

$$ \dfrac{\dfrac{}{\langle true, \sigma \rangle \to true} \quad \dfrac{}{\langle \texttt{skip}, \sigma \rangle \to \sigma} \quad \dfrac{}{\langle \texttt{while } true \texttt{ do } \texttt{skip}, \sigma \rangle \to \sigma'} (\star)}{\langle \texttt{while } true \texttt{ do } \sigma, \sigma \rangle \to \sigma'} $$

Note that the bottom part is identical to $(\star)$. We therefore have $(w, \sigma, \sigma') \in A_{n^* -1}$, contradicting with the minimality of $n^*$.
