# Introduction to Domain Theory

## CPO Revisited

### Isomorphisms

Let $(D, \sqsubseteq_D)$, $(E, \sqsubseteq_E)$ be two cpo's. A *continuous* function $f: D \mapsto E$ is an **isomorphism** if

- $f$ is a one-to-one correspondence.
- $\forall d, d' \in D.[d \sqsubseteq_D d' \Leftrightarrow f(d) \sqsubseteq_E f(d')]$.

## Constructions on CPOs

> Constructing new CPOs from existing CPOs.

### Discrete CPOs

A **discrete CPO** is a partial order $(D, \sqsubseteq)$ such that $\sqsubseteq$ is the identity relation on $D$, i.e.,

$$ \sqsubseteq = \{ (d, d) | d \in D \}. $$

- It is called *discrete* because each element only relates to itself.

**Proposition.** Let $D$ be a discrete CPO and $E$ be a CPO, then any function $f: D \mapsto E$ is continuous.

### Product CPOs

#### Cartesian Product

Let $D_1, \dots, D_k$ be $k$ CPOs, the **Cartesian product** $D_1 \times \cdots \times D_k$ is defined as

$$ (d_1,\dots,d_k) \in D_1 \times \cdots \times D_k \Longleftrightarrow d_i \in D_i, \forall i= 1,\dots,k.$$

#### Product CPO

The product CPO $(D, \sqsubseteq)$ is given by

- $D \coloneqq D_1 \times \cdots \times D_k$
- $(d_1,\dots,d_k) \sqsubseteq (d_1',\dots,d-k')$ iff $d_i \sqsubseteq d_i'$ for $i=1,\dots,k$.

*Proof.* For any $\omega$-chain

$$ (d_{1,0}, \dots, d_{k,0}) \sqsubseteq \cdots \sqsubseteq (d_{1,n},\dots,d_{k,n}), $$

we have

$$ \sqcup_{n\in\omega}(d_{1,n},\dots,d_{k,n}) = (\sqcup_{n\in\omega} d_{1,n}, \dots, \sqcup_{n\in\omega}d_{k,n}). $$

This follows from the definition of CPO and least element.

Hence $D$ is also a CPO.

- **Note.** $\sqcup_{n\in\omega}(d_{1,n},\dots,d_{k,n}) = (\sqcup_{n\in\omega} d_{1,n}, \dots, \sqcup_{n\in\omega}d_{k,n})$ is also an important property.

#### Projection

Given $k$ CPOs $D_1,\dots,D_k$ and their Cartesian product $D_1 \times \cdots \times D_k$, define the **projection function** $\pi_i$

$$ \pi_i : D_1 \times \cdots \times D_k \mapsto D_k \quad (i=1,\dots,k) $$

by

$$ \pi_i(d_1,\dots,d_k) \coloneqq d_i. $$

- $\pi_i$ is continuous. $\pi_i (\sqcup_{n\in\omega}(d_{1,n},\dots,d_{k,n})) = \pi_i(\sqcup_{n\in\omega} d_{1,n}, \dots, \sqcup_{n\in\omega}d_{k,n}) = \sqcup_{n\in\omega}d_{i,n}$.

#### Tupling Function

Let $E, D_1,\dots,D_k$ be CPOs. Let $f_i: E \mapsto D_i$ be continuous functions. Define the **tupling function**

$$ \langle f_1,\dots,f_k \rangle: E\mapsto D_1 \times \cdots \times D_k $$

by

$$ \langle f_1,\dots,f_k \rangle(e) = (f_1(e),\dots,f_k(e)). $$

- The tupling function is also continuous. This can be proved by definition.

#### Lemma 1

Let $E, D_1,\dots,D_k$ be CPOs and $h: E \mapsto D_1 \times \cdots \times D_k$ be a function. Then $h$ is continuous iff for $i=1,\dots,k$ the function $\pi_i \circ h: E \mapsto D_i$ are continuous.

*Proof.*

$\Rightarrow$. Follows from the compositionality of continuous functions.

$\Leftarrow$. We show that $h$ is actually a tupling function on $e$. For all $e \in E$,

$$\begin{align*}
    h(e) &= (\pi_1(h(e)), \dots, \pi_k(h(e))) \\
    &= (\pi_1 \circ h(e), \dots, \pi_k \circ h(e)) \\
    &= \langle \pi_1 \circ h, \dots, \pi_k \circ h \rangle(e)
\end{align*}$$

#### Lemma 2

Let $E, D_1,\dots,D_k$ be CPOs and $f: D_1 \times \cdots \times D_k \mapsto E$ be a function. Then $f$ is continuous iff for all $1 \le i \le k$ and all elements except the $i$-th dimension

$$ d_1,\dots,d_{i-1},d_{i+1},\dots,d_k $$

we have that the function $h_i: D_i \mapsto E$ defined as

$$ d \mapsto f(d_1,\dots,d_{i-1},d,d_{i+1},\dots,d_k) $$

is continuous (in $d$).

- This lemma can be used to prove a function $f$ is continuous (i.e., the $\Leftarrow$ side). To show $f$ is continuous, we only need to show $f$ is continuous in each of its dimensions.

*Proof*.

$\Rightarrow$. Follows from the definition of continuous and projection functions.

$\Leftarrow$. We take $k=2$.

For monotonicity, consider $(d_1, d_2) \sqsubseteq (d_1', d_2')$,

$$ f(d_1, d_2) \sqsubseteq f(d_1', d_2) \sqsubseteq f(d_1', d_2'), $$

where we sequentially apply the monotonicity of $h_1$ and $h_2$.

For continuity, consider the $\omega$-chain

$$ (x_0, y_0) \sqsubseteq \cdots \sqsubseteq (x_i, y_i) \sqsubseteq \cdots $$

$$ f(\sqcup_n (x_n, y_n)) = f(\sqcup_n x_n, \sqcup_n y_n) = \sqcup_n f(x_n, \sqcup_m y_m) = \sqcup_n \sqcup_m f(x_n, y_m) = \sqcup_n f(x_n, y_n). $$

#### Proposition 1

Let $E$ be a CPO and $e_{n,m}$ where $n, m \in \omega$ be elements of $E$ such that $e_{n,m} \sqsubseteq e_{n',m'}$ whenever $n \le n'$ and $m \le m'$.

We then have: the set $\{ e_{n,m} \mid n,m \in \omega \}$ has a (unique) least upper bound, given by

$$ \sqcup_{n,m \in \omega} e_{n,m} = \sqcup_{n\in\omega}(\sqcup_{m\in\omega} e_{n,m}) = \sqcup_{m\in\omega}(\sqcup_{n\in\omega} e_{n,m}) = \sqcup_{n\in\omega}e_{n,n}. $$

### Function Space

Let $D, E$ be two CPOs, define the **function space**

$$ [D \mapsto E] \coloneqq \{ f \mid f: D \mapsto E \text{ is continuous} \} $$

be the set of all continuous functions from $D$ to $E$.

For $f, g \in [D \mapsto G]$, we denote $f \sqsubseteq g$ iff $\forall d \in D. f(d) \sqsubseteq g(d)$.

**Theorem.** $([D \mapsto E], \sqsubseteq)$ is a CPO.

*Proof.* Consider any $\omega$-chain

$$ f_0 \sqsubseteq \cdots \sqsubseteq f_n \sqsubseteq \cdots. $$

The goal is to show that the least upper bound $\sqcup_{n\in\omega} f_n$ is also in $[D \mapsto E]$, which is equivalent to showing $\sqcup_{n\in\omega} f_n$ is a continuous function.

$\sqcup_{n\in\omega} f_n$ is given by

$$ (\sqcup_{n\in\omega}f_n)(d) \coloneqq \sqcup_{n\in\omega} (f_n(d)) \quad \text{for all } d \in D. $$

This shows that $\sqcup_{n\in\omega}f_n$ is a function from $D$ to $E$. We then show that it is continuous.

Consider any $\omega$-chain in $D$,

$$ d_0 \sqsubseteq \cdots \sqsubseteq d_i \sqsubseteq \cdots. $$

$$\begin{align*}
    \sqcup_{n\in\omega} f_n (\sqcup_m d_m) &= \sqcup_n \sqcup_m(f_n(d_m)) &\quad (\text{continuity of } f_n) \\
    &= \sqcup_m (\sqcup_n f_n (d_m)) &\quad (\text{Proposition 1})\\
    &= \sqcup_m ((\sqcup_n f_n)(d_m)) &\quad (\text{Definition of lub on functions})
\end{align*}$$

Hence $\sqcup_n f_n$ is a continuous function, which completes the proof.

#### Bottom Element of Function Space

If $E$ has a bottom element $\bot_E$, then $[D \mapsto E]$ also has a bottom element, given by

$$ \bot_{[D \mapsto E]}(d) \coloneqq \bot_E \quad \forall d \in D. $$

#### Powers

If $D$ is a discrete CPO, then $[D \mapsto E]$ is a **power**, denoted by $E^D$.

#### Application

Let $D, E$ be two CPOs. Define $\mathrm{apply}: ([D \mapsto E] \times D) \mapsto E$ by

$$ \mathrm{apply}(f, d) \coloneqq f(d) \quad \text{for all } f \in [D \mapsto E], d \in D. $$

**Theorem.** The function $\mathrm{apply}$ is continuous.

*Proof.* Using [Lemma 2](#lemma-2), we prove its continuity by showing $\mathrm{apply}$ is continuous in its two dimensions.

Consider $f$. For monotonicity, if $f_1 \sqsubseteq f_2$, then $\mathrm{apply}(f_1, d) = f_1(d)$, $\mathrm{apply}(f_2, d) = f_2(d)$. Since $f_1 \sqsubseteq f_2$ we have $f_1(d) \sqsubseteq f_2(d)$.

For continuity, consider $\omega$-chain $f_0 \sqsubseteq \cdots \sqsubseteq f_n \sqsubseteq \cdots$.

$$ \mathrm{apply}(\sqcup_n f_n, d) = (\sqcup_n f_n)(d) = \sqcup_n (f_n(d)) = \sqcup_n \mathrm{apply}(f_n, d). $$

Consider $d$. Monotonicity follows immediately from continuity of $f$. For continuity,

$$ \mathrm{apply}(f_n, \sqcup_n d_n) = f(\sqcup_n d_n) = \sqcup_n (f(d_n)) = \sqcup_n \mathrm{apply}(f, d_n). $$

#### $\lambda$-Notation

Let $X,Y$ be two sets and $f: X \mapsto Y$ be a function. Let $e$ be an expression representing $f$ (e.g., if $f(x) = x + 1$, then $e = x + 1$). Then we denote the function $f$ by $\lambda x \in X.e$.

The $\lambda$-Notation is simply an alternative notation of a function.

- $\lambda x \in \omega.(x+1)$ denotes $f(x) = x + 1$.
- $\lambda x \in \mathbb{R}.\sin(x)$ denotes $f(x) = \sin(x)$.

#### Currying

Let $D, E, F$ be three CPOs and $g: F \times D \mapsto E$ be a continuous function.

Define the function $\mathrm{curry}(g): F \mapsto [D \mapsto E]$ by

$$ \mathrm{curry}(g) \coloneqq \lambda v \in F. (\lambda d \in D. g(v, d)). $$

- Intuitively, for function $g(f, d) \mapsto e$, by currying over $f$, we "fix" the first parameter $f$ and make $\mathrm{curry}(g)$ a function with only one argument $d$.

##### Theorem Currying 1

**Theorem.** For all $v \in F$, $\mathrm{curry}(g)(v) \in [D \mapsto E]$.

*Proof.* $\mathrm{curry}(g)(v) = \lambda d \in D.g(v,d)$ and $g$ is continuous in its second argument.

##### Theorem Currying 2

**Theorem.** $\mathrm{curry}(g)$ is continuous.

*Proof.*

For monotonicity, if $v_1 \sqsubseteq v_2$,

$$ \lambda d \in D. g(v_1, d) \sqsubseteq \lambda d \in D. g(v_2, d) $$

since $g$ is continuous, and it is continuous (and monotonic) in its first argument.

For continuity, consider $v_0 \sqsubseteq \cdots \sqsubseteq v_n \sqsubseteq \cdots$,

$$ \mathrm{curry}(g)(\sqcup_n v_n)(d) = g(\sqcup_n v_n, d) = \sqcup_n g(v_n, d) = \sqcup_n \mathrm{curry}(g)(v_i)(d) = \sqcup_n(\mathrm{curry}(g)(v_i))(d). $$

### Lifting

> Lifting adjoins a bottom element $\bot$ below a copy of the original cpo. This can be useful in situations where we need to add a bottom element to a CPO (so as to make it a CPO with bottom, such as $\Sigma_\bot$).

Let $D$ be a CPO and $\bot$ be a fresh bottom element. Define a **copy function** $\lfloor \cdot \rfloor$ on $D$ such that

- For all $d, d' \in D$, $d = d' \Leftrightarrow \lfloor d \rfloor = \lfloor d' \rfloor$;
- $\lfloor d \rfloor \neq \bot$ for all $d \in D$;

We then define the **lifted CPO** $D_\bot$ by

- $D_\bot \coloneqq \{ \lfloor d \rfloor \mid d \in D \} \cup \{\bot \}$.
- For all $d_0', d_1' \in D_\bot$, $d_0' \sqsubseteq d_1'$ iff
  - either $d_0' = \bot$,
  - or $d_0' = \lfloor d_0 \rfloor$, $d_1' = \lfloor d_1' \rfloor = d_1$ and $d_0 \sqsubseteq_D d_1$.

**Propositions.**

- $D_\bot$ is a CPO with bottom.
- $\lfloor \cdot \rfloor: D \mapsto D_\bot$ is continuous.

#### Operator $(-)^*$

Let $D$ be a CPO, $\bot$ be a fresh bottom element, $E$ be a CPO with bottom $\bot_E$ and $f: D \mapsto E$ be a continuous function.

Define $f^*: D_\bot \mapsto E$ by

$$ f^*(d') \coloneqq \begin{cases}
    f(d) &\quad d' = \lfloor d \rfloor, d \in D\\
    \bot_E &\quad o.w. (d' = \bot)
\end{cases} $$

We extend the domain of the original function $f$ with the fresh bottom element.

**Proposition.** $f^*$ is continuous.

*Proof.* Monotonicity is straightforward. For continuity, we aim to prove

$$ f^*(\sqcup_i d_i) = \sqcup_i (f^*(d_i)). $$

**Theorem.** $(-)^*$ is continuous.

*Proof.* Monotonicity follows immediately from definition.

For continuity, consider $f_0 \sqsubseteq \cdots \sqsubseteq f_n \sqsubseteq \cdots$ and any $d' \in D$.

The goal is to prove

$$ (\sqcup_n f_n)^*(d') = (\sqcup_n (f_n)^*)(d') $$

If $d' = \bot$, then $(\sqcup_n f_n)^* (d') = (\sqcup_n (f_n)^*)(d') = \bot_E$.

If $d' = \lfloor d \rfloor$,

$$ (\sqcup_n f_n)^* (d') = (\sqcup_n f_n)(d) = \sqcup_n (f_n(d)) = \sqcup_n((f_n)^*(d)) = (\sqcup_n(f_n)^*)(d'). $$

#### The "let" Notation

We shall write

$$ \textrm{let }   x \Leftarrow d'.e $$

for the result

$$ (\lambda x. e)^*(d') $$

of applying $f^*$ to an element $d' \in D_\bot$.

I.e.,

$$ \textrm{let } x \Leftarrow d'.e \coloneqq (\lambda x \in D.e)^*(d') \quad d' \in D_\bot. $$

- If $d'$ is a non-bottom value then it returns a result determined by $e$
- Otherwise the result is $\bot_E$

##### Abbreviation of Nested "let"s

We abbreviate

$$ \textrm{let } x_1 \Leftarrow c_1 .(\textrm{let } x_2 \Leftarrow c_2. (\cdots (\textrm{let } x_k \Leftarrow c_k.e) \cdots)) $$

as

$$ \textrm{let } x_1 \Leftarrow c_1, \dots, x_k \Leftarrow c_k.e. $$

### Sums (Disjoint Union)

It is often useful to form disjoint unions of CPOs. The sum construction on CPOs generalizes that of disjoint union on sets.

Let $D_1, \dots, D_k$ be CPOs. A sum $D_1 + \cdots + D_k$ has the underlying set

$$ \{ in_1(d_1) \mid d_1 \in D_1 \} \cup \{ in_2(d_2) \mid d_2 \in D_2 \} \cup \cdots \cup \{ in_k (d_k) \mid d_k \in D_k \} $$

and partial order

$$ d_1 \sqsubseteq d_2 \Longleftrightarrow \exists 1 \le i \le k. \exists d_1', d_2'.(d_1 = in_i(d_1') \land d_2 = in_i(d_2') \land d_1' \sqsubseteq _{D_i} d_2') $$

The functions $in_i()$ are 1-1 injection functions such that

$$ in_i(d) \neq in_j(d) $$

i.e., they map the same element to disjoint elements. One example could be

$$ in_i(d_j) = \langle i, d_j \rangle. $$

- $D_1 + \cdots + D_k$ is a cpo
- Each $in_i: D_i \mapsto D_1 + \cdots + D_k$ is continuous

### Combination of Continuous Functions

Let $E, D_1, \dots, D_k$ be cpos, $f_i: D_i \mapsto E$ be continuous functions.

Define $[f_1,\dots,f_k]: D_1 + \cdots + D_k \mapsto E$ by

$$ [f_1,\dots,f_k](in_i(d_i)) \coloneqq f_i(d_i) $$

for all $i$ and $d_i \in D_i$.

- $[f_1,\dots,f_k]$ is a continuous function
- $(f_1,\dots,f_k) \mapsto [f_1,\dots,f_k]$ is continuous

## A Meta Language

We want to construct a programming-language-like syntax for continuous functions, such that the continuity is guaranteed from this syntax.

### Continuity of Expressions

Let $D,E$ be cpos, $e$ be an expression representing an element in $E$ and $x$ be a variable ranging over $D$

The expression $e$ is **continuous** in the variable $x$ if the function

$$ \lambda x \in D.e : D \mapsto E $$

is continuous no matter what values the other free variables take.


The expression $e$ is **continuous in all variables** if $e$ is continuous in all its variables.

### Construction of the Meta Language

#### Variables

Each single variable $x$ is continuous in its variables.

- $\lambda x.x$ (identity)
- $\lambda y.x (y \neq x)$ (a constant function with value $x$)

#### Constants

Constant expressions are continuous in their variables since they represent constant values.

- E.g., bottom element $\bot_D$, truth values, projection functions, $apply$, $(-)^*$, ...

#### Tupling

Let $E_1, \dots, E_k$ be cpos and $e_1, \dots, e_k$ be expressions for elements of $E_i$, $(e_1, \dots, e_k)$ be the tuple expression.

The tuple expression is continuous in its variables iff every $e_i$ is continuous in its variables.

#### Application

**Proposition.** Let $K$ be a constant continuous function (e.g., $\pi_i$, $\mathrm{apply}$) and $e$ be an expression. Then $K(e)$ is continuous in its variables if the expression $e$ is continuous in its variables.

**Proposition.** Let $e_1,e_2$ be two expressions, then $e_1(e_2)$ is continuous in its variables if both $e_1, e_2$ are continuous in its variables.

*Proof.* $e_1(e_2) = \mathrm{apply}(e_1, e_2)$ which is a composition of tupling and $\mathrm{apply}$.

#### Lambda

Let $D, E$ be cpos, $e$ be an expression that represent an element in $E$, $y$ be a variable. Then $\lambda y.e$ is continuous in its variables if the expression $e$ is continuous in its variables.
