# Convex Sets

## Affine and Convex Sets

### Lines and Line Segments

Suppose $x_1$, $x_2$ are two points in $\mathbb{R}^n$.

#### Lines

Points of the form

$$ y = \theta x_1 + (1 - \theta)x_2, $$

where $\theta \in \mathbb{R}$ forms the **line** passing through $x_1$ and $x_2$.

#### Line Segments

Values of $\theta$ between 0 and 1 forms the **line segment** between $x_1$ and $x_2$.

- Another intepretation is that $y$ is the sum of the base point $x_2$ and the direction $x_1 - x_2$ scaled by a parameter $\theta$.

### Affine Sets

#### Affine Set

A set $C$ is **affine** if the *line* through any two distinct points in $C$ lies in $C$.

!!!note Affine sets and solution sets of linear equations
    The solution set of a system of linear equations $S = \{ x | Ax = b \}$ where $A \in \mathbb{R}^{m \times n}$ and $b \in \mathbb{R}^m$ is an affine set. This can be shown by definition of affine sets.

    $\forall x_1, x_2 \in S, \forall \theta \in \mathbb{R}$, denote $x = \theta x_1 + (1-\theta) x_2$.

    $$ Ax = A(\theta x_1 + (1-\theta) x_2) = \theta Ax_1 + (1-\theta)Ax_2 = \theta b + (1-\theta)b = b $$

    Therefore $x \in S$.

    We also have a converse: Every affine set can be expressed as the solution of a system of linear equations.

#### Affine Combination

A point of the form $\theta_1 x_1 + \cdots + \theta_k x_k$, where $\sum_i \theta_i = 1$ is an **affine combination** of the points $x_1, \dots, x_k$.

!!!note ""
    An affine set contains every affine combination of its points: If $C$ is an affine set, $x_1,\dots,x_k \in C$ and $\theta_1 + \cdots + \theta_k = 1$, then the point $x = \sum_{i=1}^k \theta_kx_k$ also belongs to $C$.

    This can be shown by induction, starting from the definition of affine set (2 points).;

#### Affine Hull

The set of all affine combinations of points in some $C \subseteq \mathbb{R}^n$ is called the **affine hull** of $C$, denoted by $\mathbf{aff}(C)$.

$$ \mathbf{aff}(C) = \{ \theta_1 x_1 + \cdots + \theta_k x_k | x_1,\dots,x_k \in C, \sum_i \theta_i = 1 \} $$

### Convex Sets

> 「凹」不是凸集，但是「凸」也不是凸集。

#### Convex Set

A set $C$ is **convex** if the line segment between any two points in $C$ lies in $C$, i.e., $\forall x_1, x_2 \in C$ and any $\theta \in [0, 1]$, we have

$$ \theta x_1 + (1-\theta x_2) \in C $$

- Intuitively, every point in $C$ has a "direct line of sight" to every other point.
- Every affine set is also convex.

#### Convex Combination

We call a point of the form $\theta_1 x_1 + \theta_2 x_2 + \cdots + \theta_k x_k$ where $\theta_1 + \cdots + \theta_k = 1$ and $\theta_i \ge 0$ for any $\theta_i$ a **convex combination** of the points $x_1,\dots,x_k$.

- A convex combination can be seen as a mixture or weighted average of the points.

!!!note If a set is convex iff it contains every convex combinations of its points.
    If $C$ is convex, then any convex combinations of its points lies in $C$.

    *Proof.* Proof by induction.

    - **Basis.** $k = 2$, it holds by definition of the convex set.
    - **Induction Step.** Assume it holds for some $k = n - 1$.
      - Consider $k = n$, Let $x = \sum_{i=1}^n \theta_i x_i$.
      - Let $\gamma = \sum_{i=1}^{n-1}\theta_i$.
      - By induction basis we have $y = \frac{1}{\gamma}(\theta_1 x_1 + \cdots + \theta_{n-1} x_{n-1}) \in C$
      - Then $\gamma y + \theta_n x_n \in C$ because $y, x_n \in C$ and $\gamma + \theta_n = 1$.

#### Convex Hull

The **convex hull** of a set $C$, denoted $\mathbf{conv}C$, is the set of all convex combinations of points in $C$.

$$ \mathbf{conv}C = \{ \theta_1 x_1 + \cdots + \theta_k x_k | x_i \in C, \theta_i \ge 0, \theta_1 + \cdots + \theta_k = 1 \} $$

- The convex hull of $C$ is *always convex*.
- It is *the smallest convex set* that contains $C$.
  - If $B$ is any convex set containing $C$, $\mathbf{conv}C \subseteq B$.

### Convex Cones

#### Cones

A set $C$ is called a **cone**, or **nonnegative homogenous**, if for every $x \in C$ and $\theta \ge 0$ we have $\theta x \in C$.

#### Convex Cones

A set $C$ is called a **convex cone** if it is convex and a cone, which means for any $x_1, x_2 \in C$ and $\theta_1, \theta_2 \ge 0$,

$$ \theta_1 x_1 + \theta_2 x_2 \in C $$

- A set $C$ is a convex cone if and only if it contains all conic combinations of its elements.

#### Conic Combinations

A point of the form $\theta_1 x_1 + \theta_2 x_2 + \cdots + \theta_k x_k$ with $\theta_1,\dots,\theta_k \ge 0$ is called a **conic combination**, or a **nonnegative linear combination**, of $x_1,\dots,x_k$.

- If $x_i$ are in a convex cone $C$, then every conic combination of $x_i$ is in $C$.

#### Conic Hulls

The **conic hull** of a set $C$ is the set of all conic combinations of points in $C$,

$$ \{ \theta_1x_1 + \cdots + \theta_kx_k | x_i \in C, \theta_i \ge 0 \} $$

which is also the smallest convex cone that contains $C$.

## Examples of Convex Sets

- Trivial examples of convex sets include: Empty set $\emptyset$, $\mathbb{R}^n$, singletons (points), lines, line segments and rays.

### Hyperplanes and Halfspaces

#### Hyperplanes

A **hyperplane** is the set of the form

$$ \{ x | a^Tx = b \} $$

where $a \in \mathbb{R}^n$, $a \neq 0$ and $b \in \mathbb{R}$.

- Hyperplanes are convex, and they are also affine.
  - Can be proved by definition of convex set.

#### Halfspaces

A **(closed) halfspace** is a set of the form

$$ \{ x | a^Tx \le b \} $$

where $a \neq 0$

- Halfspaces are convex, but not affine.
  - Can be proved by definition.
- A hyperplane divides $\mathbb{R}^n$ into two halfspaces.

### Euclidean Balls and Ellipsoids

#### Euclidean Ball and Norm Ball

A **(Euclidean) ball** in $\mathbb{R}^n$ has the form

$$ B(x_c, r) = \{ x| \| x-x_c \|_2 \le r \} = \{ x | (x-x_c)^T(x-x_c) \le r^2 \} $$

!!!note A Euclidean ball is convex.
    *Proof.* $\forall x_1, x_2 \in B$ and $\forall \theta \in [0, 1]$. Let $x = \theta x_1 + (1-\theta) x_2$.

    $$ \|x\| = \| \theta x_1 + (1-\theta) x_2 \| \le \theta \| x_1 \| + (1-\theta) \| x_2 \| \le \theta r + (1-\theta) r = r $$

    Note that we use the triangle inequality and homogeneity of norms.

A generalized verion of a ball, a **norm ball**, has the form

$$ B(x_c, r) = \{ x | \| x - x_c \| \le r \} $$

where $\|\cdot\|$ denote any $p$-norm.

#### Ellipsoid

An **ellipsoid** has the form

$$ \{ x | (x - x_c)^T P^{-1} (x-x_c) \le 1 \} $$

where $P$ is *symmetric* and *positive definite*, $x_c$ is the center of the ellipsoid.

- The matrix $P$ denotes how far the ellipsoid "extends" in every direction of $x_c$.
- The lengths of the semi-axes are given by $\sqrt{\lambda_i}$, where $\lambda_i$ are the eigenvalues of $P$.
- A ball is an ellipsoid with $P = r^2I$.

Another common representation of an ellipsoid is

$$ \mathcal{E} = \{ x_c + Au | \|u\|_2 \le 1 \} $$

where $A$ is square and nonsingular.

### Norm Cones

The **norm cone** (associated with the norm $\|\cdot\|$) is the set

$$ \{ (x, t) | \| x \| \le t \} \subseteq \mathbb{R}^{n+1} $$

A norm cone is a convex cone.

A **second-order cone** (a.k.a., quadratic cone / Lorentz cone / ice-cream cone) is the norm cone for the Euclidean norm

$$ \{ (x, t) \in \mathbb{R}^{n+1} | \|x\|_2 \le t \} $$

### Polyhedra

A **polyhedron** is defined as the *solution set of a finite number of linear equalities and inequalities*.

$$ \{ x | a_i^T x \le b_i, c_j^T x = d_j \} $$

$$ \{ x | Ax \preceq b, Cx = d \} $$

where $\preceq$ denotes *componentwise inequality*.

- A polyhedron is thus the intersection of a finite number of halfspaces and hyperplanes.
- Affine sets (e.g., subspaces, hyperplanes, lines), rays, line segments and halfspaces are all polyhedra.

### Positive Semidefinite Cone

#### Notations

- $\mathbb{S}^n$ denotes the set of *symmetric* $n \times n$ matrices.
- $\mathbb{S}^n_+$ denotes the set of *positive semidefinite* matrices.
- $\mathbb{S}^n_{++}$ denotes the set of *positive definite* matrices.

#### Positive Semidefinite Matrices

If $X$ is positive semidefinite,

- All eigenvalues $\lambda_i$ of $X$ is nonnegative, $\lambda_i \ge 0$.
- $\forall z$, $z^TXz \ge 0$.
  - $X = u^T \Sigma u$ by eigenvalue decomposition.
  - Plug $X$ back to the above inequality, we have $\sum_{i} \lambda_i y_i^2 \ge 0$.

#### Positive Semidefinite Cone

The set $\mathbb{S}^n_+$ is a convex cone.

*Proof.* Let $X_1, X_2 \in \mathbb{S}^n_+$, $\forall \theta \in [0, 1]$, let $X = \theta X_1 + (1-\theta)X_2$.

$$ Z^TXZ = \theta Z^TX_1Z + (1-\theta) Z^TX_2Z \ge 0 $$

Therefore $X$ is semidefinite and $X \in \mathbb{S}^n_+$.

### Simplexes

**Sipmlexes** are an important family of polyhedra.

#### Linear and Affine Dependence

##### Linear Independence

A sequence of $n$ vectors $v_1,\dots,v_n$ is said to be **linearly dependent** if there exists scalars $a_1,\dots,a_n$ not all zero, such that

$$ a_1v_1 + \cdots + a_nv_n = 0$$

WLOG, assume $a_1 = 0$, and the above equation is

$$ v_1 = \frac{-a_2}{a_1}v_2 + \cdots + \frac{-a_n}{a_1}v_n $$

if $n > 1$, and $v_1 = 0$ if $n=1$. Therefore a set of vectors is linearly dependent iff one of them is zero, or a linear combination of others.

The vectors are said to be **linearly independent** if they are not linearly dependent. That is, if the equation

$$ a_1v_1 + \cdots + a_nv_n = 0$$

can only be satisfied by $a_i=0$ for all $a_i$.

##### Affine Independence

$m+1$ points $x_0,\dots,x_m \in \mathbb{R}^n$ are **affinely independent** if $x_1-x_0,\dots,x_m-x_0$ are linearly independent.

!!!note ""
    $x_0,\dots,x_m \in \mathbb{R}^n$ are affinely independent iff

    $$ \sum_{i=1}^m c_ix_i = 0 \quad \text{and} \quad \sum_{i=0}^m c_i = 0 \Longrightarrow c_i=0, \forall i $$

#### Simplex

An $m$-dimensional simplex, a.k.a. an $m$-simplex, is the convex hull of $m+1$ affinely independent points.

The simplex determined by affinely independent points $x_0,\dots,x_m$ is

$$ \mathbf{conv}\{ x_0,\dots,x_m \} = \{ \theta_0x_0 + \cdots + \theta_mx_m | \theta\ge 0, 1^T\theta = 1 \} $$

- $\mathbb{R}^n$ only has simplexes with $m < n$.
- 0-simplexes are points, 1-simplexes are line segments, 2-simplexes are triangles, 3-sipmlexes are tetrahedra.

## Operations that Preserve Convexity

### Intersection

Convexity is preserved under intersection. Can be proved by definition.

- If $S_1$ and $S_2$ are convex, then $S_1 \cap S_2$ is convex.
- This extends to the intersection of an infinite number of sets.

### Affine Functions

The image of a convex set $S$ under an affine function $f$ is convex. Can be proved by definition.

- Let $f(x) = Ax + b$ be an affine function and $S$ be a convex set, then $f(S) = \{ f(x) | x \in S \}$ is convex.
- If $C$ is convex, $f^{-1}(C)  = \{ x\in\mathbb{R}^n | f(x) \in C \}$ is also convex.

#### Examples

- **Scaling and translation.** If $S$ is convex, so is $\alpha S$ and $S + a$.
- **Projection.** The projection of a convex set onto some of its coordinates is convex. If $S \subseteq \mathbb{R}^m \times \mathbb{R}^n$ is convex, then $T = \{ x_1 \in \mathbb{R}^m | (x_1,x_2) \in S \text{ for some } x_2 \in \mathbb{R}^n \}$ is convex.
- **Cartesian product.** If $S_1,S_2$ are convex, then so is their direct (or Cartesian) product $S_1 \times S_2 = \{ (x_1,x_2) | x_1 \in S_1, x_2 \in S_2 \}$
- **Sum.** The sum of two sets, defined as $S_1 + S_2 = \{ x+y| x \in S_1, y \in S_2 \}$ is convex.
  - To see this, note that $S_1 + S_2$ is the image of $S_1 \times S_2$ under the linear function $f(x,y) = x + y$.
- **Partial sum.** The partial sum of $S_1, S_2 \in \mathbb{R}^n \times \mathbb{R}^m$, defined as $S = \{ (x, y_1 + y_2) | (x, y_1) \in S_1, (x,y_2) \in S_2 \}$ is convex.
  - For $m=0$, it gives the intersection. For $n=0$, it gives the set addition.

### Perspective Function

A **perspective function** $P: \mathbb{R}^{n+1} \mapsto \mathbb{R}^n$ with domain $\mathbf{dom}P = \mathbb{R}^n \times \mathbb{R}_{++}$ has the form $P(z, t) = z/t$.

- If $C \subseteq \mathbf{dom}P$ is convex, then its image $P(C)$ is also convex.
  - A perspective function can be think of as some sort of "pin-hole" camera. Therefore intuitively the image of a convex set under this pin-hole camera is of course convex.

### Linear-Fractional Function

A **linear-fractional** function is formed by composing the perspective function with an affine function.

$$ f(x) = \frac{Ax + b}{c^Tx + d} \quad \mathbf{dom}(f) = \{ c^Tx + d > 0 \} $$

is called a **linear-fractional function** (or **projective function**).

- If $C$ is convex and lies in the domain of $f$, then its image $f(C)$ is convex.
