# Convex Sets

> By default, $a \in \mathbb{R}^n$ is a *column vector*.

## Affine and Convex Sets

### Lines and Line Segments

Suppose $x_1$, $x_2$ are two points in $\mathbb{R}^n$. Points of the form

$$ y = \theta x_1 + (1 - \theta)x_2 $$

where $\theta \in \mathbb{R}$ forms the **line** passing through $x_1$ and $x_2$.

Values of $\theta$ between 0 and 1 forms the **line segment** between $x_1$ and $x_2$.

Another intepretation is that $y$ is the sum of the base point $x_2$ and the direction $x_1 - x_2$ scaled by a parameter $\theta$.

### Affine Sets

A set $C$ is **affine** if the line through any two distinct points in $C$ lies in $C$.

!!!note Affine sets and solution sets of linear equations
    The solution set of a system of linear equations $\{ x | Ax = b \}$ where $A \in \mathbb{R}^{m \times n}$ and $b \in \mathbb{R}^m$ is an affine set.

    We also have a converse: Every affine set can be expressed as the solution of a system of linear equations.

#### Affine Combination and Affine Hull

A point of the form $\theta_1 x_1 + \cdots + \theta_k x_k$, where $\sum_i \theta_i = 1$ is an **affine combination** of the points $x_1, \dots, x_k$.

The set of all affine combinations of points in some $C \subseteq \mathbb{R}^n$ is called the **affine hull** of $C$, denoted by $\mathbf{aff}(C)$.

$$ \mathbf{aff}(C) = \{ \theta_1 x_1 + \cdots + \theta_k x_k | x_1,\dots,x_k \in C, \sum_i \theta_i = 1 \} $$

### Convex Sets

A set $C$ is **convex** if the line segment between any two points in $C$ lies in $C$, i.e., $\forall x_1, x_2 \in C$ and any $\theta \in [0, 1]$, we have

$$ \theta x_1 + (1-\theta x_2) \in C $$

> 「凹」不是凸集，但是「凸」也不是凸集。

#### Convex Combination

We call a point of the form $\theta_1 x_1 + \theta_2 x_2 + \cdots + \theta_k x_k$ where $\theta_1 + \cdots + \theta_k = 1$ and $\theta_i \ge 0$ for any $\theta_i$ a **convex combination** of the points $x_1,\dots,x_k$.

!!!note If a set is convex if and only if it contains every convex combinations of its points.
    If $C$ is convex, then any convex combinations of its points lies in $C$.

    *Proof.* Proof by induction.

    - **Basis.** $k = 2$, it holds by definition of the convex set.
    - **Induction Step.** Assume it holds for some $k = n - 1$.
      - Consider $k = n$, Let $x = \sum_{i=1}^n \theta_i x_i$.
      - Let $\gamma = \sum_{i=1}^{n-1}\theta_i$.
      - By induction basis we have $y = \frac{1}{\gamma}(\theta_1 x_1 + \cdots + \theta_{n-1} x_{n-1}) \in C$
      - Then $\gamma y + \theta_n x_n \in C$ because $y, x_n \in C$ and $\gamma + \theta_n = 1$.

#### Convex Hull

The **convex hull** of a set $C$, denoted $\mathbf{conv}C$, is the set of all convex combinations of points in $C$.

$$ \mathbf{conv}C = \{ \theta_1 x_1 + \cdots + \theta_k x_k | x_i \in C, \theta_i \ge 0, \theta_1 + \cdots + \theta_k = 1 \} $$

- The convex hull of $C$ is *always convex*.
- It is *the smallest convex set* that contains $C$.
  - If $B$ is any convex set containing $C$, $\mathbf{conv}C \subseteq B$.

### Convex Cones

#### Cones

A set $C$ is called a **cone**, or **nonnegative homogenous**, if for every $x \in C$ and $\theta \ge 0$ we have $\theta x \in C$.

#### Conic Combinations

A point of the form $\theta_1 x_1 + \theta_2 x_2 + \cdots + \theta_k x_k$ with $\theta_1,\dots,\theta_k \ge 0$ is called a **conic combination**, or a **nonnegative linear combination**, of $x_1,\dots,x_k$.

#### Convex Cones

A set $C$ is called a **convex cone** if it is convex and a cone.

- A set $C$ is a convex cone if and only if it contains all conic combinations of its elements.

## Examples of Convex Sets

### Hyperplanes and Halfspaces

#### Hyperplanes

A **hyperplane** is the set of the form

$$ \{ x | a^Tx = b \} $$

where $a \in \mathbb{R}^n$, $a \neq 0$ and $b \in \mathbb{R}$.

#### Halfspace

A hyperplane divides $\mathbb{R}^n$ into two halfspaces.

A **(closed) halfspace** is a set of the form

$$ \{ x | a^Tx \le b \} $$

where $a \neq 0$

- Halfspaces are convex, but not affine.

### Euclidean Balls and Ellipsoids

#### Euclidean Ball and Norm Ball

A **(Euclidean) ball** in $\mathbb{R}^n$ has the form

$$ B(x_c, r) = \{ x| \| x-x_c \|_2 \le r \} = \{ x | (x-x_c)^T(x-x_c) \le r^2 \} $$

!!!note A Euclidean ball is convex.
    *Proof.* $\forall x_1, x_2 \in B$ and $\forall \theta \in [0, 1]$. Let $x = \theta x_1 + (1-\theta) x_2$.

    $$ \|x\| = \| \theta x_1 + (1-\theta) x_2 \| \le \theta \| x_1 \| + (1-\theta) \| x_2 \| \le \theta r + (1-\theta) r = r $$

    Note that we use the triangle inequality and homogeneity of norms.

A generalized verion of a ball, a **norm ball**, has the form

$$ B(x_c, r) = \{ x | \| x - x_c \| \le r \} $$

where $\|\cdot\|$ denote any $p$-norm.

#### Ellipsoid

An **ellipsoid** has the form

$$ \{ x | (x - x_c)^T P^{-1} (x-x_c) \le 1 \} $$

where $P$ is *symmetric* and *positive definite*.

### Norm Cones

The **norm cone** (associated with the norm $\|\cdot\|$) is the set

$$ \{ (x, t) | \| x \| \le t \} \subseteq \mathbb{R}^{n+1} $$

- A norm cone is a convex cone.

### Polyhedra

A **polyhedron** is defined as the *solution set of a finite number of linear equalities and inequalities*.

$$ \{ x | a_i^T x \le b_i, c_j^T x = d_j \} $$

$$ \{ x | Ax \preceq b, Cx = d \} $$

where $\preceq$ denotes *componentwise inequality*.

### Positive Semidefinite Cone

#### Notations

- $\mathbb{S}^n$ denotes the set of *symmetric* $n \times n$ matrices.
- $\mathbb{S}^n_+$ denotes the set of *positive semidefinite* matrices.
- $\mathbb{S}^n_{++}$ denotes the set of *positive definite* matrices.

#### Positive Semidefinite Matrices

If $X$ is positive semidefinite,

- All eigenvalues $\lambda_i$ of $X$ is nonnegative, $\lambda_i \ge 0$.
- $\forall Z$, $Z^TXZ \ge 0$.
  - $X = u^T \Sigma u$ by eigenvalue decomposition.
  - Plug $X$ back to the above inequality, we have $\sum_{i} \lambda_i y_i^2 \ge 0$.

#### Positive Semidefinite Cone

The set $\mathbb{S}^n_+$ is a convex cone.

*Proof.* Let $X_1, X_2 \in \mathbb{S}^n_+$, $\forall \theta \in [0, 1]$, let $X = \theta X_1 + (1-\theta)X_2$.

$$ Z^TXZ = \theta Z^TX_1Z + (1-\theta) Z^TX_2Z \ge 0 $$

Therefore $X$ is semidefinite and $X \in \mathbb{S}^n_+$.

## Operations that Preserve Convexity

- **Intersection.** Convexity is preserved under intersection.
  - If $S_1$ and $S_2$ are convex, then $S_1 \cap S_2$ is convex.
  - This extends to the intersection of an infinite number of sets.
  - *Prove by definition.*
- **Affine Functions.** The image of a convex set $S$ under an affine function $f$ is convex.
  - Let $f(x) = Ax + b$ be an affine function and $S$ be a convex set, then $f(S) = \{ f(x) | x \in S \}$ is convex.
  - If $C$ is convex, $f^{-1}(C)  = \{ x\in\mathbb{R}^n | f(x) \in C \}$ is also convex.
  - *Prove by definition.*
- **Perspective Functions.**
  - A **perspective function** $P: \mathbb{R}^{n+1} \mapsto \mathbb{R}^n$ with domain $\mathbf{dom}P = \mathbb{R}^n \times \mathbb{R}_{++}$ has the form $P(z, t) = z/t$.
  - If $C \subseteq \mathbf{dom}P$ is convex, then its image $P(C)$ is also convex.
- **Linear-Fractional Functions.** TBD.