# Data Analytics

## Data Mining

- **Data mining** refers to the process of analyzing large databases to find useful patterns.
- The most widely used applications of data mining are those that require some sort of **prediction**.
- Another class of applications look for **associations**.

### Classification

Given that an item belongs to one of several classes, and given past instances (training instances) of items along with the
classes to which they belong, the problem is to predict the class to which a new item belongs.

#### Decision Tree

- Uses a tree
- Each *leaf* node has an associated class.
- Each *internal* node has a predicate (more generally, a function) associated with it.
- Building a decision tree.
  - ID3, C4.5, CART, etc.
- Inference with a decision tree.
  - Start from the root node and traverse the tree to reach a leaf.
  - At internal nodes, find which child should go according to the predicate.

##### Basic Algorithm

1. Initialization. Root node contains all data in the training set.
2. Consider node $N$ with set $D$.
   1. (No need to split). If all samples in $D$ belongs to the same category, then $N$ becomes a leaf node.
   2. (Cannot split further). If samples in $D$ do not contain attributes to be further splitted, then $N$ becomes a leaf node, whose label is the majority label of $D$.
   3. ...?
3. ...?

##### Splitting Nodes

- **Principle.** Split $D$ into several "pure" subsets (i.e., subsets containing samples of the same category)
- **Attribute selection.** Rank the score of attributes and select the attribute with the highest score.
  - Information gain, Gini index, etc.
- **Condition.**
  - If $A$ is discrete, create a child for each of the value of $A$.
    - If a binary tree is required, then find a subset $S$ and split by predicate $A \in S$.
  - If $A$ is continuous, select a threshold $v$ and split by $A < v$ and $A \ge v$.